=head1 Name

sqitch-engine - Manage database engine configuration

=head1 Synopsis

  sqitch engine
  sqitch engine [-v | --verbose]
  sqitch engine add <name> [engine-options]
  sqitch engine alter <name> [engine-options]
  sqitch engine remove <name>
  sqitch engine show <name>
  sqitch engine update-config

=head1 Description

Manage the database engines you deploy to. The list of supported engines
includes:

=over

=item * C<firebird>

=item * C<mysql>

=item * C<oracle>

=item * C<pg>

=item * C<sqlite>

=item * C<vertica>

=back

Each engine may have a number of properties:

=over

=item C<target>

The name or URI of the database target. Note that if the value is a URI, the
engine in the URI must match the engine being added or altered. The default is
C<db:$engine>. See L<sqitch-target> for details on target configuration.

=item C<registry>

The name of the registry schema or database. The default is C<sqitch>.

=item C<client>

The command-line client to use. If not specified, each engine looks in the OS
Path for an appropriate client.

=item C<top_dir>

The path to the top directory for the engine. This directory generally
contains the plan file and subdirectories for deploy, revert, and verify
scripts, as well as reworked instances of those scripts. The default is F<.>,
the current directory.

=item C<plan_file>

The plan file to use for this engine. The default is C<$top_dir/sqitch.plan>.

=item C<deploy_dir>

The path to the deploy directory for the engine. This directory contains all
of the deploy scripts referenced by changes in the C<plan_file>. The default
is C<$top_dir/deploy>.

=item C<revert_dir>

The path to the revert directory for the engine. This directory contains all
of the revert scripts referenced by changes in the C<plan_file>. The default
is C<$top_dir/revert>.

=item C<verify_dir>

The path to the verify directory for the engine. This directory contains all
of the verify scripts referenced by changes in the C<plan_file>. The default
is C<$top_dir/verify>.

=item C<reworked_dir>

The path to the reworked directory for the engine. This directory contains all
subdirectories for all reworked scripts referenced by changes in the
C<plan_file>. The default is C<$top_dir>.

=item C<reworked_deploy_dir>

The path to the reworked deploy directory for the engine. This directory
contains all of the reworked deploy scripts referenced by changes in the
C<plan_file>. The default is C<$reworked_dir/deploy>.

=item C<reworked_revert_dir>

The path to the reworked revert directory for the engine. This directory
contains all of the reworked revert scripts referenced by changes in the
C<plan_file>. The default is C<$reworked_dir/revert>.

=item C<reworked_verify_dir>

The path to the reworked verify directory for the engine. This directory
contains all of the reworked verify scripts referenced by changes in the
C<plan_file>. The default is C<$reworked_dir/verify>.

=item C<extension>

The file name extension to append to change names to create script file names.
The default is C<sql>.

=back

Each of these overrides the corresponding core configuration -- for example,
the C<core.target>, C<core.plan_file>, C<core.registry>, and C<core.client>
L<config|sqitch-config> options.

=head1 Options

=over

=item List Option

=over

=item C<-v>

=item C<--verbose>

  sqitch engine --verbose

Be more verbose when listing engines.

=back

=item Add and Alter Options

=over

=item C<--top-dir>

  sqitch engine add pg --top-dir sql

Specifies the top directory to use for the engine. Typically contains the
deployment plan file and the change script directories.

=item C<--plan-file>

  sqitch engine add pg --plan-file my.plan

Specifies the path to the deployment plan file. Defaults to
C<$top_dir/sqitch.plan>.

=item C<--extension>

  sqitch engine add pg --extension ddl

Specifies the file name extension to use for change script file names.
Defaults to C<sql>.

=item C<--dir>

  sqitch engine add pg --dir deploy=dep --dir revert=rev --dir verify=tst

Sets the path to a script directory. May be specified multiple times.
Supported keys are:

=over

=item * C<deploy>

=item * C<revert>

=item * C<verify>

=item * C<reworked>

=item * C<reworked_deploy>

=item * C<reworked_revert>

=item * C<reworked_verify>

=back

=item C<--target>

  sqitch engine add pg --target db:pg:widgets

Specifies the name or L<URI|https://github.com/theory/uri-db/> of the target
database for the engine.

=item C<--registry>

  sqitch engine add pg --registry meta
  
Specifies the name of the database object where Sqitch's state and history
data is stored. Typically a schema name (as in PostgreSQL and Oracle) or a
database name (as in SQLite and MySQL). Defaults to C<sqitch>.

=item C<--client>

  sqitch engine add pg --client /usr/local/pgsql/bin/psql

Specifies the path to the command-line client for the engine. Defaults to a
client in the current path named appropriately for the engine.

=back

=back

=head1 Actions

With no arguments, shows a list of existing engines. Several actions are
available to perform operations on the engines.

=head2 C<add>

Add an engine named C<< <name> >> for the database at C<< <uri> >>. The
C<--set> option specifies engine-specific properties. A new plan file and
new script script directories will be created if they don't already exist.

=head2 C<alter>

Alter an engine named C<< <name> >>. The C<--set> option specifies
engine-specific properties to set. New script script directories will be
created if they don't already exist.

=head2 C<remove>, C<rm>

Remove the engine named C<< <name> >> from the configuration. The plan file
and script directories will not be affected.

=head2 C<show>

Gives some information about the engine C<< <name> >>, including the
associated properties. Specify multiple engine names to see information for
each.

=head2 C<update-config>

Update the configuration from a configuration file that predates the addition
of the C<engine> command to Sqitch.

=head1 Configuration Variables

The engines are stored in the configuration file, but the command itself
currently relies on no configuration variables.

=head1 Sqitch

Part of the L<sqitch> suite.
