=head1 Name

sqitch-plan - Show database change planned changes

=head1 Synopsis

  sqitch [options] plan [<options>]

=head1 Description

The C<plan> command displays information about planned changes. By default, it
will show all the changes for the current plan, but you can also search for
changes matching regular expressions, and limit the results.

=head1 Options

=over

=item C<--event>

Filter by event type. May be specified more than once. Allowed values are:

=over

=item * C<deploy>

=item * C<revert>

=back

=item C<--change-pattern>

=item C<--change>

A regular expression to match against change names.

=item C<--planner-pattern>

=item C<--planner>

A regular expression to match against planner names.

=item C<--format>

=item C<-f>

The format to use. May be one of:

=over

=item C<full>

=item C<long>

=item C<medium>

=item C<short>

=item C<oneline>

=item C<raw>

=item C<< format:<string> >>

=back

See L</Formats> for details on each format. Defaults to C<medium>.

=item C<--date-format>

=item C<--date>

Format to use for timestamps. Defaults to C<iso>. Allowed values:

=over

=item C<iso>

=item C<iso8601>

Shows timestamps in ISO-8601 format.

=item C<rfc>

=item C<rfc2822>

Show timestamps in RFC-2822 format.

=item C<full>

=item C<long>

=item C<medium>

=item C<short>

Show timestamps in the specified format length, using the system locale's
C<LC_TIME> category.

=item C<raw>

Show timestamps in raw format, which is strict ISO-8601 in the UTC time zone.

=item C<strftime:$string>

Show timestamps using an arbitrary C<strftime> pattern. See
L<DateTime/strftime Paterns> for comprehensive documentation of supported
patterns.

=item C<cldr:$pattern>

Show timestamps using an arbitrary C<cldr> pattern. See
L<DateTime/CLDR Paterns> for comprehensive documentation of supported
patterns.

=back

=item C<--max-count>

=item C<-n>

Limit the number of changes to output.

=item C<--skip>

Skip the specified number changes before starting to show the output.

=item C<--reverse>

Output the changes in reverse order. 

=item C<--no-reverse>

Do not output the changes in reverse order. 

=item C<--color>

Show colored output. The value may be one of:

=over

=item C<auto> (the default)

=item C<always>

=item C<never>

=back

=item C<--no-color>

Turn off colored output. It is the same as C<--color never>.

=item C<--abbrev>

Instead of showing the full 40-byte hexadecimal change ID, show only a partial
prefix the specified number of characters long.

=back

=head1 Configuration Variables

=over

=item C<plan.format>

Output format to use. Supports the same values as C<--format>.

=item C<plan.date_format>

Format to use for timestamps. Supports the same values as the C<--date-format>
option.

=item C<plan.color>

Output colors. Supports the same values as the C<--color> option.

=back

=head1 Formats

There are several built-in formats, and you can emit data in a custom format
C<< format:<string> >> format. Here are the details of the built-in formats:

=over

=item C<oneline>

  <change id> <event type> <change name> <title line> <tags>

This is designed to be as compact as possible.

=item C<short>

  <event type> <change id>
  Name:      <change name>
  Planner:   <planner>

  <title line>

=item C<medium>

  <event type> <change id>
  Name:      <change name>
  Planner:   <planner>
  Date:      <commit date>

  <full change note>

=item C<long>

  <event type> <change id> <tags>
  Name:      <change name>
  Project:   <change name>
  Planner:   <planner>

  <full change note>

=item C<full>

  <event type> <change id> <tags>
  Event:     <event type>
  Name:      <change name>
  Project:   <change name>
  Requires:  <required changes>
  Conflicts: <conflicting changes>
  Planner:   <planner>
  Planned:   <plan date>

  <full change note>

=item C<raw>

  <event type> <change id> <tags>
  name      <change name>
  project   <project name>
  requires  <required changes>
  conflicts <conflicting changes>
  planner   <planner>
  planned   <raw plan date>

  <full change note>

Suitable for parsing: the change ID is displayed in full, without regard to
the value of C<--abbrev>; dates are formatted raw (strict ISO-8601 format in
the UTC time zone); and all labels are lowercased and unlocalized.

=item C<< format:<string> >>

The C<< format:<string> >> format allows you to specify which information you
want to show. It works a little bit like C<printf> format and a little like
Git plan format. For example, this format:

  format:The planner of %h was %{name}p%vThe title was >>%s<<%v

Would show something like this:

  The planner of f26a3s was Tom Lane
  The title was >>We really need to get this right.<<

The placeholders are:

=over

=item * C<%H>: Event change ID

=item * C<%h>: Event change ID (respects C<--abbrev>)

=item * C<%n>: Event change name

=item * C<%o>: Event change project name

=item * C<%($len)h>: abbreviated change of length C<$len>

=item * C<%e>: Event type (deploy, revert, fail)

=item * C<%l>: Localized lowercase event type label

=item * C<%L>: Localized title case event type label

=item * C<%c>: Change planner name and email address

=item * C<%{name}p>: Change planner name

=item * C<%{email}p>: Change planner email address

=item * C<%{date}p>: plan date (respects C<--date-format>)

=item * C<%{date:rfc}p>: plan date, RFC2822 format

=item * C<%{date:iso}p>: plan date, ISO-8601 format

=item * C<%{date:full}p>: plan date, full format

=item * C<%{date:long}p>: plan date, long format

=item * C<%{date:medium}p>: plan date, medium format

=item * C<%{date:short}p>: plan date, short format

=item * C<%{date:cldr:$pattern}p>: plan date, formatted with custom L<CLDR pattern|DateTime/CLDR Patterns>

=item * C<%{date:strftime:$pattern}p>: plan date, formatted with custom L<strftime pattern|DateTime/strftime Patterns>

=item * C<%t>: Comma-delimited list of tags

=item * C<%{$sep}t>: list of tags delimited by C<$sep>

=item * C<%T>: Parenthesized list of comma-delimited tags

=item * C<%{$sep}T>: Parenthesized list of tags delimited by C<$sep>

=item * C<%s>: Subject (a.k.a. title line)

=item * C<%r>: Comma-delimited list of required changes

=item * C<%{$sep}r>: list of required changes delimited by C<$sep>

=item * C<%R>: Localized label and list of comma-delimited required changes

=item * C<%{$sep}R>: Localized label and list of required changes delimited by C<$sep>

=item * C<%x>: Comma-delimited list of conflicting changes

=item * C<%{$sep}x>: list of conflicting changes delimited by C<$sep>

=item * C<%X>: Localized label and list of comma-delimited conflicting changes

=item * C<%{$sep}X>: Localized label and list of conflicting changes delimited by C<$sep>

=item * C<%b>: Body

=item * C<%B>: Raw body (unwrapped subject and body)

=item * C<%{$prefix}>B: Raw body with C<$prefix> prefixed to every line

=item * C<%{event}_> Localized label for "event"

=item * C<%{change}_> Localized label for "change"

=item * C<%{planner}_> Localized label for "planner"

=item * C<%{by}_> Localized label for "by"

=item * C<%{date}_> Localized label for "date"

=item * C<%{planned}_> Localized label for "planned"

=item * C<%{name}_> Localized label for "name"

=item * C<%{project}_> Localized label for "project"

=item * C<%{email}_> Localized label for "email"

=item * C<%{requires}_> Localized label for "requires"

=item * C<%{conflicts}_> Localized label for "conflicts"

=item * C<%v> vertical space (newline)

=item * C<%{$color}C>: An ANSI color: black, red, green, yellow, reset, etc.

=item * C<%{:event}C>: An ANSI color based on event type (green deploy, blue revert, red fail)

=item * C<%{$attribute}a>: The raw attribute name and value, if it exists and has a value

=back

=back

=head1 Sqitch

Part of the L<sqitch> suite.
