=encoding UTF-8

=head1 Name

sqitchtutorial-sqlcmd - A tutorial introduction to Sqitch change management on MS SQL Server

=head1 Synopsis

  sqitch *

=head1 Description

This tutorial explains how to create a sqitch-enabled MS SQL Server project, use a VCS
for deployment planning, and work with other developers to make sure changes
remain in sync and in the proper order.

We'll start by creating new project from scratch, a fictional antisocial
networking site called Flipr. All examples use L<Git|http://git-scm.com/> as
the VCS and L<MS SQL Server> as the storage engine.

If you'd like to manage an PostgreSQL database, see L<sqitchtutorial>.

If you'd like to manage an SQLite database, see L<sqitchtutorial-sqlite>.

If you'd like to manage an Oracle database, see L<sqitchtutorial-oracle>.

If you'd like to manage an MySQL database, see L<sqitchtutorial-mysql>.

If you'd like to manage an Firebird database, see L<sqitchtutorial-firebird>.

If you'd like to manage an Vertica database, see L<sqitchtutorial-vertica>.

=head1 Starting a New Project

Usually the first thing to do when starting a new project is to create a
source code repository. So let's do that with Git:

  > mkdir flipr
  > cd flipr 
  > git init .
  Initialized empty Git repository in /flipr/.git/
  > touch README.md
  > git add .
  > git commit -am 'Initialize project, add README.'
  [master (root-commit) fdf2a40] Initialize project, add README.
   1 file changed, 38 insertions(+)
   create mode 100644 README.md

If you're a Git user and want to follow along the history, the repository used
in these examples is L<on GitHub|https://github.com/theory/sqitch-sqlcmd-intro>.

Now that we have a repository, let's get started with Sqitch. Every Sqitch
project must have a name associated with it, and, optionally, a unique URI. We
recommend including the URI, as it increases the uniqueness of object
identifiers internally, so let's specify one when we initialize Sqitch:

  > sqitch --engine sqlcmd init flipr --uri https://github.com/theory/sqitch-sqlcmd-intro/
  Created sqitch.conf
  Created sqitch.plan
  Created deploy/
  Created revert/
  Created verify/

Let's have a look at F<sqitch.conf>:

  > cat sqitch.conf
  [core]
  	engine = sqlcmd
  	# plan_file = sqitch.plan
  	# top_dir = .
  	# deploy_dir = deploy
  	# revert_dir = revert
  	# verify_dir = verify
  	# extension = sql
  # [core "sqlcmd"]
  	# target = db:sqlcmd:
  	# registry = sqitch
  	# client = sqlcmd.exe

Good, it picked up on the fact that we're creating changes for the MSSQL
engine, thanks to the C<--engine sqlcmd> option, and saved it to the file.
Furthermore, it wrote a commented-out C<[core "sqlcmd"]> section with all the
available MSSQL engine-specific settings commented out and ready to be edited
as appropriate.

So, edit the comments out to get Sqitch to use the settings. Then type the
following to change and add new settings for the target database and the uri 
for SQL Server.

  > sqitch config core.sqlcmd.target db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
  > sqitch config core.sqlcmd.dsn flipr_test
  > sqitch config core.sqlcmd.uri "DBI:ODBC:Driver={SQL Server}"

Let's have a look at F<sqitch.conf> now:

  > cat sqitch.conf
  [core]
  	engine = sqlcmd
  	plan_file = sqitch.plan
  	top_dir = .
  	deploy_dir = deploy
  	revert_dir = revert
  	verify_dir = verify
  	extension = sql
  [core "sqlcmd"]
  	target = db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
  	registry = sqitch
  	client = sqlcmd.exe
  	dsn = flipr_test
  	uri = DBI:ODBC:Driver={SQL Server}

By default, Sqitch will read F<sqitch.conf> in the current directory for
settings. But it will also read F<~/.sqitch/sqitch.conf> for user-specific
settings. 

Let's tell it who we are, since this data will be used in all
of our projects:

  > sqitch config --user user.name 'Marge N. O’Vera'
  > sqitch config --user user.email 'marge@example.com'

Have a look at F<~/.sqitch/sqitch.conf> and you'll see this:

  > cat ~/.sqitch/sqitch.conf
  [user]
  	name = Marge N. O’Vera
  	email = marge@example.com

Which means that Sqitch should be able to find C<mysql> for any project, and
that it will always properly identify us when planning and committing changes.

Back to the repository. Have a look at the plan file, F<sqitch.plan>:

  > cat sqitch.plan
  %syntax-version=1.0.0-b2
  %project=flipr
  %uri=https://github.com/theory/sqitch-sqlcmd-intro/


Note that it has picked up on the name and URI of the app we're building.
Sqitch uses this data to manage cross-project dependencies. The
C<%syntax-version> pragma is always set by Sqitch, so that it always knows how
to parse the plan, even if the format changes in the future.

Let's commit these changes and start creating the database changes.

  > git add .
  > git commit -am 'Initialize Sqitch configuration.'
  [master 79fe2cc] Initialize Sqitch configuration.
   2 files changed, 19 insertions(+)
   create mode 100644 sqitch.conf
   create mode 100644 sqitch.plan

=head1 Our First Change

First, our app will need a database user, so let's create one. Run this
command:

  > sqitch add appuser -n 'Creates an application user.'
  Created deploy/appuser.sql
  Created revert/appuser.sql
  Created verify/appuser.sql
  Added "appuser" to sqitch.plan

The L<C<add>|sqitch-add> command adds a database change to the plan and writes
deploy, revert, and verify scripts that represent the change. Now we edit
these files. The C<deploy> script's job is to create the table. By default,
the F<deploy/appuser.sql> file looks like this:

  -- Deploy appuser

  BEGIN TRANSACTION Deploy;

  -- XXX Add DDLs here.

  COMMIT TRANSACTION Deploy;

What we want to do is to replace the C<XXX> comment with the C<CREATE USER>
statement, like so:

  -- Deploy users

  BEGIN TRANSACTION Deploy;

  CREATE USER flipr;

  COMMIT TRANSACTION Deploy;

The C<revert> script's job is to precisely revert the change to the deploy
script, so we edit this to F<revert/appuser.sql> to look like this:

  -- Revert users

  BEGIN TRANSACTION Revert;

  DROP USER flipr;

  COMMIT TRANSACTION Revert;

Now we can try deploying this change. First create the flipr_test database and then run this command:

  > sqitch deploy
  Deploying changes to db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
    + appuser .. ok

First Sqitch created the registry schema and tables used to track database
changes. The registry schema is created in the database to which the
C<appuser> change was deployed; by default, its name is C<sqitch>, and will be
used to manage I<all> projects on the database. Ideally, only Sqitch
data will be stored in this schema.

If you'd like it to use a different schema, use
C<sqitch config core.mysql.registry $name> to configure it (or via the
L<C<target> command|sqitch-target>; more L<below|/On Target>).

Next, Sqitch deploys changes to the target database, which we specified on the
command-line. We only have one change so far; the C<+> reinforces the idea
that the change is being I<added> to the database.

With this change deployed, if you connect to the database, you'll be able to
see the user.

=head2 Trust, But Verify

But that's too much work. do you really want to do something like that after
every deploy?

Here's where the C<verify> script comes in. Its job is to test that the deploy
did was it was supposed to. It should do so without regard to any data that
might be in the database, and should throw an error if the deploy was not
successful. The simplest way to see if a user exists is to check the
C<sys.sysusers> table. However, throwing an error in the event that the user
does not exist is tricky in SQL Server. To simplify things, Sqitch provides a
custom function you can use in your tests, C<verify>. You pass an expression 
which evaluates to 1. If the expression evaluates to 0 or NULL, an exception 
will be thrown.

Give it a try. Put this query into F<verify/appuser.sql>:

  sqitch.verify "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM sys.sysusers WHERE user = 'flipr'";

This will work well as long as we know that the registry schema is named
C<sqitch>. If you've set C<core.sqlcmd.registry> to a different value, you
will need to make sure you specify the correct schema name in the script.

Now you can run the C<verify> script with the L<C<verify>|sqitch-verify>
command:

  > sqitch verify
  Verifying flipr_test
    * appuser .. ok
  Verify successful

Looks good! If you want to make sure that the verify script correctly dies if
the table doesn't exist, temporarily change the user name in the script to
something that doesn't exist, something like:

  sqitch.verify "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM sys.sysusers WHERE user = 'nonesuch'";


Then L<C<verify>|sqitch-verify> again:

  > sqitch verify
  Verifying db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
    
  not ok

  Verify Summary Report
  ---------------------
  Changes: 1
  Errors:  1
  Verify failed

Don't forget to change the table name back before continuing!

=head2 Status, Revert, Log, Repeat

For purely informational purposes, we can always see how a deployment was
recorded via the L<C<status>|sqitch-status> command, which reads the tables
from the registry database:

  > sqitch status
  # On database db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
  # Project:  flipr
  # Change:   f56dd1a1ab029f398cec2cebb2ecc527fa0332c2
  # Name:     appuser
  # Deployed: 2013-12-31 13:13:17 -0800
  # By:       Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com>
  # 
  Nothing to deploy (up-to-date)

Let's make sure that we can revert the change:

  > sqitch revert
  Revert all changes from db:sqlcmd:flipr_test? [Yes] 
    - appuser .. ok

The L<C<revert>|sqitch-revert> command first prompts to make sure that we
really do want to revert. This is to prevent unnecessary accidents. You can
pass the C<-y> option to disable the prompt. Also, notice the C<-> before the
change name in the output, which reinforces that the change is being
I<removed> from the database. And now the schema should be gone.

And the status message should reflect as much:

  > sqitch status
  # On database db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
  No changes deployed

Of course, since nothing is deployed, the L<C<verify>|sqitch-verify> command
has nothing to verify:

  > sqitch verify
  Verifying db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
  No changes deployed

However, we still have a record that the change happened, visible via the
L<C<log>|sqitch-log> command:

  > sqitch log
  On database db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
  Revert f56dd1a1ab029f398cec2cebb2ecc527fa0332c2
  Name:      appuser
  Committer: Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com>
  Date:      2013-12-31 13:26:39 -0800

      Creates a an application user.

  Deploy f56dd1a1ab029f398cec2cebb2ecc527fa0332c2
  Name:      appuser
  Committer: Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com>
  Date:      2013-12-31 13:13:17 -0800

      Creates an application user.

Note that the actions we took are shown in reverse chronological order, with
the revert first and then the deploy.

Cool. Now let's commit it.

  > git add .
  > git commit -m 'Add the "flipr" user.'
  [master c63acb9] Add the "flipr" user.
   4 files changed, 23 insertions(+)
   create mode 100644 deploy/appuser.sql
   create mode 100644 revert/appuser.sql
   create mode 100644 verify/appuser.sql

And then deploy again. This time, let's use the C<--verify> option, so that
the C<verify> script is applied when the change is deployed:

  > sqitch deploy --verify
  Deploying changes to db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
    + appuser .. ok

And now the C<flipr> user should be back.

When we look at the status, the deployment will be there:

  > sqitch status
  # On database db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
  # Project:  flipr
  # Change:   f56dd1a1ab029f398cec2cebb2ecc527fa0332c2
  # Name:     appuser
  # Deployed: 2013-12-31 13:28:23 -0800
  # By:       Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com>
  # 
  Nothing to deploy (up-to-date)

=head1 Deploy with Dependency

Let's add another change, this time to create a table. Our app will need
users, of course, so we'll create a table for them. First, add the new change:

  > sqitch add users --requires appuser -m 'Creates table to track our users.'
  Created deploy/users.sql
  Created revert/users.sql
  Created verify/users.sql
  Added "users [appuser]" to sqitch.plan

Note that we're requiring the C<appuser> change as a dependency of the new
C<users> change. Although that change has already been added to the plan and
therefore should always be applied before the C<users> change, it's a good
idea to be explicit about dependencies.

Now edit the scripts. When you're done, F<deploy/users.sql> should look like
this:

  -- Deploy users
  -- requires: appuser

  CREATE TABLE dbo.users (
      nickname  VARCHAR(512) NOT NULL,
      password  VARCHAR(512) NOT NULL,
      timestamp DATETIME  NOT NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY CLUSTERED
  (
  	nickname ASC
  	)
  );

  GRANT SELECT ON TABLE dbo.users TO flipr;
  
  IF EXISTS (SELECT * FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TABLES WHERE TABLE_SCHEMA
  = 'sqitch' AND TABLE_NAME = 'users')
  
  INSERT INTO dbo.users SELECT * FROM sqitch.users;

A few things to notice here. On the second line, the dependence on the
C<appuser> change has been listed. This doesn't do anything, but the default
SQL Server C<deploy> template lists it here for your reference while editing the
file. Useful, right?

The C<flipr> user has been granted C<SELECT> access to the table. The app
needs to read the data, right? This is why we need to require the C<appuser>
change.

Because this is a table, we also check if there was a backup of the data on
the sqitch schema, so that any data is not lost.

Now for the verify script. Add this to F<verify/users.sql>;

  sqitch.verify "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TABLES WHERE
  TABLE_SCHEMA = 'dbo' AND TABLE_NAME = 'users'"

Now for the revert script. Add this to
F<revert/users.sql>:
 
  IF EXISTS (SELECT * FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TABLES WHERE TABLE_SCHEMA
  = 'sqitch' AND TABLE_NAME = 'users')

  DROP TABLE sqitch.users;
  
  SELECT * INTO sqitch.users FROM dbo.users;
  
  DROP TABLE dbo.users;

We first drop the backup table on sqitch and then take a backup of the users
table before dropping it. Let's deploy this bad boy:

  > sqitch deploy
  Deploying changes to db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
    + users .. ok

We know, since verification is enabled, that the table must have been created.
But for the purposes of visibility, have a quick look to see if that is so.

We can also verify all currently deployed changes with the
L<C<verify>|sqitch-verify> command:

  > sqitch verify
  Verifying db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
    * appuser .. ok
    * users .... ok
  Verify successful

Now have a look at the status:

  > sqitch status
  # On database db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
  # Project:  flipr
  # Change:   2bd1190fdb324c2609f0c7f0cef73d8cb434ba0e
  # Name:     users
  # Deployed: 2013-12-31 13:34:25 -0800
  # By:       Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com>
  # 
  Nothing to deploy (up-to-date)

Success! Let's make sure we can revert the change, as well:

  > sqitch revert --to @HEAD^^ -y
  Reverting changes to appuser from flipr_test
    - users .. ok

Note that we've used the C<--to> option to specify the change to revert to.
And what do we revert to? The symbolic tag C<@HEAD>, when passed to
L<C<revert>|sqitch-revert>, always refers to the last change deployed to the
database. (For other commands, it refers to the last change in the plan.)
Appending the carets (C<^^>) tells Sqitch to select the change I<prior> to the
last deployed change. So we revert to C<appuser>, the penultimate change. The
other potentially useful symbolic tag is C<@ROOT>, which refers to the first
change deployed to the database (or in the plan, depending on the command).

Back to the database. The C<users> table should be gone but the C<flipr> user
should still be around.

The L<C<status>|sqitch-status> command politely informs us that we have
undeployed changes:

  > sqitch status
  # On database db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
  # Project:  flipr
  # Change:   f56dd1a1ab029f398cec2cebb2ecc527fa0332c2
  # Name:     appuser
  # Deployed: 2013-12-31 13:28:23 -0800
  # By:       Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com>
  # 
  Undeployed change:
    * users

As does the L<C<verify>|sqitch-verify> command:

  > sqitch verify
  Verifying db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
    * appuser .. ok
  Undeployed change:
    * users
  Verify successful

Note that the verify is successful, because all currently-deployed changes are
verified. The list of undeployed changes (just "users" here) reminds us about
the current state.

Okay, let's commit and deploy again:

  > git add .
  > git commit -am 'Add users table.'
  [master 7c99fb0] Add users table.
   4 files changed, 31 insertions(+)
   create mode 100644 deploy/users.sql
   create mode 100644 revert/users.sql
   create mode 100644 verify/users.sql
  > sqitch deploy
  Deploying changes to flipr_test
    + users .. ok

Looks good. Check the status:

  > sqitch status
  # On database db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
  # Project:  flipr
  # Change:   2bd1190fdb324c2609f0c7f0cef73d8cb434ba0e
  # Name:     users
  # Deployed: 2013-12-31 13:37:02 -0800
  # By:       Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com>
  # 
  Nothing to deploy (up-to-date)

Excellent. Let's do some more!

=head1 Add Two at Once

Let's add a couple more changes to add functions for managing users.

  > sqitch add insert_user --requires users --requires appuser \
    -n 'Creates a function to insert a user.'
  Created deploy/insert_user.sql
  Created revert/insert_user.sql
  Created verify/insert_user.sql
  Added "insert_user [users appuser]" to sqitch.plan

  > sqitch add change_pass --requires users --requires appuser \
    -n 'Creates a function to change a user password.'
  Created deploy/change_pass.sql
  Created revert/change_pass.sql
  Created verify/change_pass.sql
  Added "change_pass [users appuser]" to sqitch.plan

Now might be a good time to have a look at the deployment plan:

  > cat sqitch.plan
  %syntax-version=1.0.0-b2
  %project=flipr
  %uri=https://github.com/theory/sqitch-mysql-intro/

  appuser 2013-12-31T21:04:04Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates a an application user.
  users [appuser] 2013-12-31T21:32:48Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates table to track our users.
  insert_user [users appuser] 2013-12-31T21:37:29Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates a function to insert a user.
  change_pass [users appuser] 2013-12-31T21:37:36Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates a function to change a user password.

Each change appears on a single line with the name of the change, a bracketed
list of dependencies, a timestamp, the name and email address of the user who
planned the change, and a note.

Let's write the code for the new changes. Here's what
F<deploy/insert_user.sql> should look like:

  -- Deploy insert_user
  -- requires: users
  -- requires: appuser


  CREATE PROCEDURE insert_user
      @nickname VARCHAR(512),
      @password VARCHAR(512)
  AS
      INSERT INTO users (nickname, password, timestamp)
      VALUES (@nickname, HashBytes('sha1',@password),GETDATE());
  END


  GRANT EXECUTE ON insert_user to flipr;


Here's what F<verify/insert_user.sql> might look like, using the Sqitch
C<verify> function again:

  -- Verify insert_user

  sqitch.verify "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.ROUTINES WHERE
  ROUTINE_SCHEMA = 'dbo' AND ROUTINE_NAME = 'insert_user';

We simply take advantage of the fact that the new procedure should be listed
in the INFORMATION_SCHEMA.ROUTINES table and throw an exception if it does not exist.

And F<revert/insert_user.sql> should look something like this:

  -- Revert insert_user
  
  DROP PROCEDURE insert_user;


Now for C<change_pass>; F<deploy/change_pass.sql> might look like this:

  -- Deploy change_pass
  -- requires: users
  -- requires: appuser

  CREATE PROCEDURE change_pass
      @nickname VARCHAR(512),
      @oldpass  VARCHAR(512),
      @newpass  VARCHAR(512)
  AS
      UPDATE users
         SET password = HashBytes('sha1',@newpass)
       WHERE nickname = @nickname
         AND password = HashBytes('sha1',@oldpass);
      RETURN ROW_COUNT();
  END;


  GRANT EXECUTE ON change_pass to flipr;


Use C<verify> in F<verify/change_pass.sql> again:

  sqitch.verify "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.ROUTINES WHERE
  ROUTINE_SCHEMA = 'dbo' AND ROUTINE_NAME = 'change_pass';

And of course, its C<revert> script, F<revert/change_pass.sql>, should look
something like:

  -- Revert change_pass
 
  DROP PROCEDURE change_pass;


Try em out!

  > sqitch deploy
  Deploying changes to db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
    + insert_user .. ok
    + change_pass .. ok

Do we have the procedures? Of course we do, they were verified. Still, do have a
look.


And what's the status?

  > sqitch status
  # On database db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
  # Project:  flipr
  # Change:   b0a598b91ce97cf1b95ded97a6452bf03231a2cd
  # Name:     change_pass
  # Deployed: 2013-12-31 13:39:49 -0800
  # By:       Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com>
  # 
  Nothing to deploy (up-to-date)

Looks good. Let's make sure revert works:

  > sqitch revert -y --to @HEAD^^
  Reverting changes to users from flipr_test
    - change_pass .. ok
    
  > sqitch revert -y --to @HEAD^^  
  Reverting changes to users from flipr_test
    - insert_user .. ok
 

Note the use of C<@HEAD^^> to specify that the revert be to one change prior
the last deployed change. Looks good. Let's do the commit and re-deploy dance:

  > git add .
  > git commit -m 'Add `insert_user()` and `change_pass()`.'
  [master 0f95e13] Add `insert_user()` and `change_pass()`.
   7 files changed, 86 insertions(+)
   create mode 100644 deploy/change_pass.sql
   create mode 100644 deploy/insert_user.sql
   create mode 100644 revert/change_pass.sql
   create mode 100644 revert/insert_user.sql
   create mode 100644 verify/change_pass.sql
   create mode 100644 verify/insert_user.sql

  > sqitch deploy
  Deploying changes to db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
    + insert_user .. ok
    + change_pass .. ok

  > sqitch status
  # On database db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
  # Project:  flipr
  # Change:   b0a598b91ce97cf1b95ded97a6452bf03231a2cd
  # Name:     change_pass
  # Deployed: 2013-12-31 13:40:40 -0800
  # By:       Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com>
  # 
  Nothing to deploy (up-to-date)

  > sqitch verify
  Verifying db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
    * appuser ...... ok
    * users ........ ok
    * insert_user .. ok
    * change_pass .. ok
  Verify successful

Great, we're fully up-to-date!

=head1 Ship It!

Let's do a first release of our app. Let's call it C<1.0.0-dev1> Since we want
to have it go out with deployments tied to the release, let's tag it:

  > sqitch tag v1.0.0-dev1 -n 'Tag v1.0.0-dev1.'
  Tagged "change_pass" with @v1.0.0-dev1
  > git commit -am 'Tag the database with v1.0.0-dev1.'
  [master 0595297] Tag the database with v1.0.0-dev1.
   1 file changed, 1 insertion(+)
  > git tag v1.0.0-dev1 -am 'Tag v1.0.0-dev1'

Now let's bundle everything up for release:

  > sqitch bundle
  Bundling into bundle/
  Writing config
  Writing plan
  Writing scripts
    + appuser
    + users
    + insert_user
    + change_pass @v1.0.0-dev1

Now we can package the F<bundle> directory and distribute it. When it gets
installed somewhere, users can use Sqitch to deploy to the database.

Let's try deploying the bundle:

First, create a new database, say flipr_dev. Then go to the bundle directory:

  > cd bundle
  
Now enter the following to repoint the deployment:

  > sqitch config core.sqlcmd.target db:sqlcmd:flipr_dev
  > sqitch config core.sqlcmd.dsn flipr_dev

Let's have a look at F<sqitch.conf> now:

  > cat sqitch.conf
  [core]
  	engine = sqlcmd
  	plan_file = sqitch.plan
  	top_dir = .
  	deploy_dir = deploy
  	revert_dir = revert
  	verify_dir = verify
  	extension = sql
  [core "sqlcmd"]
  	target = db:sqlcmd:flipr_dev
  	registry = sqitch
  	client = sqlcmd.exe
  	dsn = flipr_dev
  	uri = DBI:ODBC:Driver={SQL Server}

  Now deploy it:
  
  > sqitch deploy
  Deploying changes to db:sqlcmd:flipr_dev
    + appuser ................... ok
    + users ..................... ok
    + insert_user ............... ok
    + change_pass @v1.0.0-dev1 .. ok

Great, all four changes were deployed and C<change_pass> was tagged with
C<@v1.0.0-dev1>. Let's have a look at the status:

  > sqitch status
  # On database db:sqlcmd:flipr_dev
  # Project:  flipr
  # Change:   b0a598b91ce97cf1b95ded97a6452bf03231a2cd
  # Name:     change_pass
  # Tag:      @v1.0.0-dev1
  # Deployed: 2013-12-31 13:44:04 -0800
  # By:       Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com>
  # 
  Nothing to deploy (up-to-date)

Looks good, eh? Go ahead and revert it:

  > sqitch revert -y
  Reverting all changes from db:sqlcmd:flipr_dev
    - change_pass @v1.0.0-dev1 .. ok
    - insert_user ............... ok
    - users ..................... ok
    - appuser ................... ok

Now package it up and ship it!

=head1 Flip Out

Now that we've got the basics of user management done, let's get to work on
the core of our product, the "flip." Since other folks are working on other
tasks in the repository, we'll work on a branch, so we can all stay out of
each other's way. So let's branch:

  > git checkout -b flips
  Switched to a new branch 'flips'

Now we can add a new change to create a table for our flips.

  > sqitch add flips -r appuser -r users -m 'Adds table for storing flips.'
  Created deploy/flips.sql
  Created revert/flips.sql
  Created verify/flips.sql
  Added "flips [appuser users]" to sqitch.plan

You know the drill by now. Edit F<deploy/flips.sql>:

  -- Deploy flips
  -- requires: appuser
  -- requires: users

  CREATE TABLE dbo.flips (
      id        INT   PRIMARY KEY,
      nickname  VARCHAR(512) NOT NULL REFERENCES dbo.users(nickname),
      body      VARCHAR(512) NOT NULL,
      timestamp DATETIME NOT NULL DEFAULT GETDATE()
  );

And edit F<revert/flips.sql>:

  -- Revert flips

  DROP TABLE dbo.flips;


And give it a whirl:

  > sqitch deploy
  Deploying changes to db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
    + appuser ................... ok
    + users ..................... ok
    + insert_user ............... ok
    + change_pass @v1.0.0-dev1 .. ok

Look good?

  > sqitch status --show-tags
  # On database db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
  # Project:  flipr
  # Change:   b3ccd37da58ac232c23edfa0adaf2d6f483842fd
  # Name:     flips
  # Deployed: 2013-12-31 13:55:04 -0800
  # By:       Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com>
  # 
  # Tag:
  #   @v1.0.0-dev1 - 2013-12-31 13:55:04 -0800 - Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com>
  # 
  Nothing to deploy (up-to-date)

Note the use of C<--show tags> to show all the deployed tags. Now make it so:

  > git add .
  > git commit -am 'Add flips table.'
  [flips ce1b53d] Add flips table.
   4 files changed, 37 insertions(+)
   create mode 100644 deploy/flips.sql
   create mode 100644 revert/flips.sql
   create mode 100644 verify/flips.sql

=head1 Wash, Rinse, Repeat

Now comes the time to add functions to manage flips. I'm sure you have things
nailed down now. Go ahead and add C<insert_flip> and C<delete_flip> changes
and commit them. The C<insert_flip> deploy script might look something like:

  -- Deploy insert_flip
  -- requires: flips
  -- requires: appuser

  CREATE PROCEDURE insert_flip
      @nickname VARCHAR(512),
      @body     VARCHAR(180)
  AS
      INSERT INTO flips (nickname, body)
      VALUES (@nickname, @body);

  GRANT EXECUTE insert_flip to flipr;


And the C<delete_flip> deploy script might look something like:

  -- Deploy delete_flip
  -- requires: flips
  -- requires: appuser

  CREATE PROCEDURE delete_flip
      @flip_id INT
  AS
      DELETE FROM flips WHERE id = @flip_id;
      RETURN ROW_COUNT();

  GRANT EXECUTE ON delete_flip to flipr;

  COMMIT;

The C<verify> scripts are:

  -- Verify insert_flip

  sqitch.verify "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.ROUTINES WHERE
  ROUTINE_SCHEMA = 'dbo' AND ROUTINE_NAME = 'insert_flip'"

And:

  -- Verify delete_flip

  sqitch.verify "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.ROUTINES WHERE
  ROUTINE_SCHEMA = 'dbo' AND ROUTINE_NAME = 'delete_flip'"

The C<revert> scripts are:

  -- Revert insert_flip

  DROP PROCEDURE insert_flip;


And:

  -- Revert delete_flip

  DROP PROCEDURE delete_flip;


Test L<C<deploy>|sqitch-deploy> and
L<C<revert>|sqitch-revert>, then commit it to the repository. The status
should end up looking something like this:

  > sqitch status --show-tags
  # On database db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
  # Project:  flipr
  # Change:   7bf30e6b7b0a4e61f30dd4148f5b837bdddae086
  # Name:     delete_flip
  # Deployed: 2013-12-31 13:58:54 -0800
  # By:       Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com>
  # 
  # Tag:
  #   @v1.0.0-dev1 - 2013-12-31 13:55:04 -0800 - Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com>
  # 
  Nothing to deploy (up-to-date)

Good, we've finished this feature. Now make it so:

  > git add .
  > git commit -am "Add manage flips procedures."
  [flips a44c2d5] Add manage flips procedures.
  7 files changed, 39 insertions(+)
  create mode 100644 deploy/delete_flip.sql
  create mode 100644 deploy/insert_flip.sql
  create mode 100644 revert/delete_flip.sql
  create mode 100644 revert/insert_flip.sql
  create mode 100644 verify/delete_flip.sql
  create mode 100644 verify/insert_flip.sql

Time to merge back into C<master>.

[However in the meantime someone else has been working on the master branch.

  > git checkout master
  Switched to branch 'master'

  > sqitch add flipr_schema -m "Add flipr schema."
  Created deploy\flipr_schema.sql
  Created revert\flipr_schema.sql
  Created verify\flipr_schema.sql
  Added "flipr_schema" to sqitch.plan

  > git add .
  > git commit -am "Add flipr schema."
  
]


=head2 Emergency

  > git merge --no-ff flips
  Auto-merging sqitch.plan
  CONFLICT (content): Merge conflict in sqitch.plan
  Automatic merge failed; fix conflicts and then commit the result.

Oh, a conflict in F<sqitch.plan>. Not too surprising, since both the merged
C<lists> branch and our C<flips> branch added changes to the plan. Let's try a
different approach.

The truth is, we got lazy. Those changes when we pulled master from the origin
should have raised a red flag. It's considered a bad practice not to look at
what's changed in C<master> before merging in a branch. What one I<should> do
is either:

=over

=item *

Rebase the F<flips> branch from master before merging. This "rewinds" the
branch changes, pulls from C<master>, and then replays the changes back on top
of the pulled changes.

=item *

Create a patch and apply I<that> to master. This is the sort of thing you
might have to do if you're sending changes to another user, especially if the
VCS is not Git.

=back

So let's restore things to how they were at master:

  > git reset --hard HEAD
  HEAD is now at 5a58089 Merge branch 'lists'

That throws out our botched merge. Now let's go back to our branch and rebase
it on C<master>:

  > git checkout flips
  Switched to branch 'flips'
  > git rebase master
  First, rewinding head to replay your work on top of it...
  Applying: Add flips table.
  Using index info to reconstruct a base tree...
  M	sqitch.plan
  Falling back to patching base and 3-way merge...
  Auto-merging sqitch.plan
  CONFLICT (content): Merge conflict in sqitch.plan
  Failed to merge in the changes.
  Patch failed at 0001 Add flips table.
  The copy of the patch that failed is found in:
     .git/rebase-apply/patch

  When you have resolved this problem, run "git rebase --continue".
  If you prefer to skip this patch, run "git rebase --skip" instead.
  To check out the original branch and stop rebasing, run "git rebase --abort".

Oy, that's kind of a pain. It seems like no matter what we do, we'll need to
resolve conflicts in that file. Except in Git. Fortunately for us, we can tell
Git to resolve conflicts in F<sqitch.plan> differently. Because we only ever
append lines to the file, we can have it use the "union" merge driver, which,
according to L<its
docs|http://git-scm.com/docs/gitattributes#_built-in_merge_drivers>:

=over

Run 3-way file level merge for text files, but take lines from both versions,
instead of leaving conflict markers. This tends to leave the added lines in
the resulting file in random order and the user should verify the result. Do
not use this if you do not understand the implications.

=back

This has the effect of appending lines from all the merging files, which is
exactly what we need. So let's give it a try. First, back out the botched
rebase:

  > git rebase --abort

Now add the union merge driver to F<.gitattributes> for F<sqitch.plan>
and rebase again:

  > echo sqitch.plan merge=union > .gitattributes
  > git rebase master
  First, rewinding head to replay your work on top of it...
  Applying: Add flips table.
  Using index info to reconstruct a base tree...
  M	sqitch.plan
  Falling back to patching base and 3-way merge...
  Auto-merging sqitch.plan
  Applying: Add functions to insert and delete flips.
  Using index info to reconstruct a base tree...
  M	sqitch.plan
  Falling back to patching base and 3-way merge...
  Auto-merging sqitch.plan

Ah, that looks a bit better. Let's have a look at the plan:

  > cat sqitch.plan
  %syntax-version=1.0.0-b2
  %project=flipr
  %uri=https://github.com/theory/sqitch-sqlcmd-intro/

  appuser 2013-12-31T21:04:04Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates a an application user.
  users [appuser] 2013-12-31T21:32:48Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates table to track our users.
  insert_user [users appuser] 2013-12-31T21:37:29Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates a function to insert a user.
  change_pass [users appuser] 2013-12-31T21:37:36Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates a function to change a user password.
  @v1.0.0-dev1 2013-12-31T21:41:08Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Tag v1.0.0-dev1.

  lists [appuser users] 2013-12-31T21:46:22Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Adds table for storing lists.
  insert_list [lists appuser] 2013-12-31T21:48:14Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates a function to insert a list.
  delete_list [lists appuser] 2013-12-31T21:49:41Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates a function to insert a list.
  flips [appuser users] 2013-12-31T21:53:03Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Adds table for storing flips.
  insert_flip [flips appuser] 2013-12-31T21:56:12Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates a function to insert a flip.
  delete_flip [flips appuser] 2013-12-31T21:56:22Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates a function to delete a flip.

Note that it has appended the changes from the merged "lists" branch, and then
merged the changes from our "flips" branch. Test it to make sure it works as
expected:

  > sqitch rebase -y
  Reverting all changes from flipr_test
    - delete_flip ............... ok
    - insert_flip ............... ok
    - flips ..................... ok
    - change_pass @v1.0.0-dev1 .. ok
    - insert_user ............... ok
    - users ..................... ok
    - appuser ................... ok
  Deploying changes to flipr_test
    + appuser ................... ok
    + users ..................... ok
    + insert_user ............... ok
    + change_pass @v1.0.0-dev1 .. ok
    + lists ..................... ok
    + insert_list ............... ok
    + delete_list ............... ok
    + flips ..................... ok
    + insert_flip ............... ok
    + delete_flip ............... ok

Note the use of L<C<rebase>|sqitch-rebase>, which combines a
L<C<revert>|sqitch-revert> and a L<C<deploy>|sqitch-deploy> into a single
command. Handy, right? It correctly reverted our changes, and then deployed
them all again in the proper order. So let's commit F<.gitattributes>; seems
worthwhile to keep that change:

  > git add .
  > git commit -m 'Add `.gitattributes` with union merge for `sqitch.plan`.'
  [flips d813f7c] Add `.gitattributes` with union merge for `sqitch.plan`.
   1 file changed, 1 insertion(+)
   create mode 100644 .gitattributes

=head2 Merges Mastered

And now, finally, we can merge into C<master>:

  > git checkout master
  Switched to branch 'master'
  > git merge --no-ff flips -m "Merge branch 'flips'"
  Merge made by the 'recursive' strategy.
   .gitattributes         |  1 +
   deploy/delete_flip.sql | 22 ++++++++++++++++++++++
   deploy/flips.sql       | 16 ++++++++++++++++
   deploy/insert_flip.sql | 24 ++++++++++++++++++++++++
   revert/delete_flip.sql |  7 +++++++
   revert/flips.sql       |  7 +++++++
   revert/insert_flip.sql |  7 +++++++
   sqitch.plan            |  3 +++
   verify/delete_flip.sql | 10 ++++++++++
   verify/flips.sql       | 12 ++++++++++++
   verify/insert_flip.sql | 10 ++++++++++
   11 files changed, 119 insertions(+)
   create mode 100644 .gitattributes
   create mode 100644 deploy/delete_flip.sql
   create mode 100644 deploy/flips.sql
   create mode 100644 deploy/insert_flip.sql
   create mode 100644 revert/delete_flip.sql
   create mode 100644 revert/flips.sql
   create mode 100644 revert/insert_flip.sql
   create mode 100644 verify/delete_flip.sql
   create mode 100644 verify/flips.sql
   create mode 100644 verify/insert_flip.sql

And double-check our work:

  > cat sqitch.plan
  %syntax-version=1.0.0-b2
  %project=flipr
  %uri=https://github.com/theory/sqitch-mysql-intro/

  appuser 2013-12-31T21:04:04Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates a an application user.
  users [appuser] 2013-12-31T21:32:48Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates table to track our users.
  insert_user [users appuser] 2013-12-31T21:37:29Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates a function to insert a user.
  change_pass [users appuser] 2013-12-31T21:37:36Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates a function to change a user password.
  @v1.0.0-dev1 2013-12-31T21:41:08Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Tag v1.0.0-dev1.

  lists [appuser users] 2013-12-31T21:46:22Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Adds table for storing lists.
  insert_list [lists appuser] 2013-12-31T21:48:14Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates a function to insert a list.
  delete_list [lists appuser] 2013-12-31T21:49:41Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates a function to insert a list.
  flips [appuser users] 2013-12-31T21:53:03Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Adds table for storing flips.
  insert_flip [flips appuser] 2013-12-31T21:56:12Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates a function to insert a flip.
  delete_flip [flips appuser] 2013-12-31T21:56:22Z Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com> # Creates a function to delete a flip.

Much much better, a nice clean master now. And because it is now identical to
the "flips" branch, we can just carry on. Go ahead and tag it, bundle, and
release:

  > sqitch tag v1.0.0-dev2 -n 'Tag v1.0.0-dev2.'
  Tagged "delete_flip" with @v1.0.0-dev2
  > git commit -am 'Tag the database with v1.0.0-dev2.'
  [master 76d6e15] Tag the database with v1.0.0-dev2.
   1 file changed, 1 insertion(+)
  > git tag v1.0.0-dev2 -am 'Tag v1.0.0-dev2'
  > sqitch bundle --dest-dir flipr-1.0.0-dev2
  Bundling into flipr-1.0.0-dev2
  Writing config
  Writing plan
  Writing scripts
    + appuser
    + users
    + insert_user
    + change_pass @v1.0.0-dev1
    + lists
    + insert_list
    + delete_list
    + flips
    + insert_flip
    + delete_flip @v1.0.0-dev2

Note the use of the C<--dest-dir> option to C<sqitch bundle>. Just a nicer way
to create the top-level directory name so we don't have to rename it from
F<bundle>.

=head1 In Place Changes

Someone wants to change insert_user to use CURRENT_TIMESTAMP instead of GETDATE().

Normally, modifying procedures in database changes is a
L<PITA|http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=pita>. You have to make
changes like these:

=over

=item 1.

Copy F<deploy/insert_user.sql> to F<deploy/insert_user_current_timestamp.sql>.

=item 2.

Edit F<deploy/insert_user_current_timestamp.sql> to switch from C<GETDATE()> to C<CURRENT_TIMESTAMP>.

=item 3.

Copy F<deploy/insert_user.sql> to F<revert/insert_user_current_timestamp.sql>.
Yes, copy the original change script to the new revert change.

=item 4.

Copy F<verify/insert_user.sql> to F<verify/insert_user_current_timestamp.sql>.

=item 5.

Edit F<verify/insert_user_current_timestamp.sql> to test that the procedure now properly
uses C<CURRENT_TIMESTAMP>.

=item 6.

Test the changes to make sure you can deploy and revert the
C<insert_user_current_timestamp> change.


=back

But you can have Sqitch do it for you. The only requirement is that a tag
appear between the two instances of a change we want to modify. In general,
you're going to make a change like this after a release, which you've tagged
anyway, right? Well we have, with C<@v1.0.0-dev2> added in the previous
section. With that, we can let Sqitch do most of the hard work for us, thanks
to the L<C<rework>|sqitch-rework> command, which is similar to
L<C<add>|sqitch-add>:

  > sqitch rework insert_user -m 'Change insert_user to use current_timestamp.'
  Added "insert_user [insert_user@v1.0.0-dev2]" to sqitch.plan.
  Modify these files as appropriate:
    * deploy/insert_user.sql
    * revert/insert_user.sql
    * verify/insert_user.sql

Oh, so we can edit those files in place. Nice! How does Sqitch do it? Well, in
point of fact, it has copied the files to stand in for the previous instance
of the C<insert_user> change, which we can see via C<git status>:

  > git status
  # On branch master
  # Your branch is ahead of 'origin/master' by 5 commits.
  #   (use "git push" to publish your local commits)
  #
  # Changes not staged for commit:
  #   (use "git add <file>..." to update what will be committed)
  #   (use "git checkout -- <file>..." to discard changes in working directory)
  #
  #	modified:   revert/insert_user.sql
  #	modified:   sqitch.plan
  #
  # Untracked files:
  #   (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
  #
  #	deploy/insert_user@v1.0.0-dev2.sql
  #	revert/insert_user@v1.0.0-dev2.sql
  #	verify/insert_user@v1.0.0-dev2.sql
  no changes added to commit (use "git add" and/or "git commit -a")

The "untracked files" part of the output is the first thing to notice. They
are all named C<insert_user@v1.0.0-dev2.sql>. What that means is: "the
C<insert_user> change as it was implemented as of the C<@v1.0.0-dev2> tag."
These are copies of the original scripts, and thereafter Sqitch will find them
when it needs to run scripts for the first instance of the C<insert_user>
change. As such, it's important not to change them again. But hey, if you're
reworking the change, you shouldn't need to.

The other thing to notice is that F<revert/insert_user.sql> has changed.
Sqitch replaced it with the original deploy script. As of now,
F<deploy/insert_user.sql> and F<revert/insert_user.sql> are identical. This is
on the assumption that the deploy script will be changed (we're reworking it,
remember?), and that the revert script should actually change things back to
how they were before. Of course, the original deploy script may not be
L<idempotent|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idempotence> -- that is, able to be
applied multiple times without changing the result beyond the initial
application. If it's not, you will likely need to modify it so that it
properly restores things to how they were after the original deploy script was
deployed. Or, more simply, it should revert changes back to how they were
as-of the deployment of F<deploy/insert_user@v1.0.0-dev2.sql>.

For SQL Server we can achieve this by modifying the scripts to ALTER PROCEDURE. 
So let's do it. We'll modify the scripts to ALTER the PROCEDURES to use C<CURRENT_TIMESTAMP>. Make this
change to F<deploy/insert_user.sql>:

  -- Deploy insert_user
  -- requires: users
  -- requires: appuser


  ALTER PROCEDURE insert_user
      @nickname VARCHAR(512),
      @password VARCHAR(512)
  AS
      INSERT INTO users (nickname, password, timestamp)
      VALUES (@nickname, HashBytes('sha1',@password),CURRENT_TIMESTAMP);



  GRANT EXECUTE ON insert_user to flipr;
  
We also need to change the revert script, F<revert/insert_user.sql> to use ALTER:

  -- Deploy insert_user
  -- requires: users
  -- requires: appuser


  ALTER PROCEDURE insert_user
      @nickname VARCHAR(512),
      @password VARCHAR(512)
  AS
      INSERT INTO users (nickname, password, timestamp)
      VALUES (@nickname, HashBytes('sha1',@password),GETDATE());



  GRANT EXECUTE ON insert_user to flipr;

And now we're ready to try a deployment:

  >     sqitch deploy
  Deploying changes to db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
    + insert_user .. ok
    + change_pass .. ok

So, are the changes deployed?

 CREATE PROCEDURE dbo.insert_user
      @nickname VARCHAR(512),
      @password VARCHAR(512)
  AS
      INSERT INTO users (nickname, password, timestamp)
      VALUES (@nickname, HashBytes('sha1',@password),CURRENT_TIMESTAMP);
  

Awesome, the stored passwords are different now. But can we revert, even
though we haven't written any reversion scripts?

  > sqitch revert --to @HEAD^^ -y
  Reverting changes to delete_flip @v1.0.0-dev2 from flipr_test
    - insert_user .. ok

Did that work, is C<GETDATE()> back?

  CREATE PROCEDURE dbo.insert_user
        @nickname VARCHAR(512),
        @password VARCHAR(512)
    AS
        INSERT INTO users (nickname, password, timestamp)
      VALUES (@nickname, HashBytes('sha1',@password),GETDATE());

Yes, it works! Sqitch properly finds the original instances of these changes
in the new script files that include tags.

But what about the verify script? How can we verify that the functions have
been modified to use C<CURRENT_TIMESTAMP>? I think the simplest thing to do is to
examine the body of the function as returned by
C<INFORMATION_SCHEMA.ROUTINES>
So the C<insert_user> verify script looks like this:

  -- Verify insert_user
  
    sqitch.verify "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.ROUTINES WHERE
    ROUTINE_SCHEMA = 'dbo' AND ROUTINE_NAME = 'insert_user'
    AND ROUTINE_DEFINITION like '%CURRENT_TIMESTAMP%';


Make sure these pass by re-deploying:

  > sqitch deploy
  Deploying changes to db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
    + insert_user .. ok

Excellent. Let's go ahead and commit this change:

  > git add .
  > git commit -m 'Use current_timestamp.'
  [master abcce73] Use current_timestamp.
   13 files changed, 137 insertions(+), 9 deletions(-)
  
   create mode 100644 deploy/insert_user@v1.0.0-dev2.sql
   create mode 100644 revert/insert_user@v1.0.0-dev2.sql
   create mode 100644 verify/insert_user@v1.0.0-dev2.sql

  > sqitch status
  # On database db:sqlcmd:flipr_test
  # Project:  flipr
  # Change:   6f2e1cd4b1c031a66930811328cfcdb0389d8320
  # Name:     insert_user
  # Deployed: 2013-12-31 14:16:45 -0800
  # By:       Marge N. O’Vera <marge@example.com>
  # 
  Nothing to deploy (up-to-date)

=head1 More to Come

Sqitch is a work in progress. Better integration with version control systems
is planned to make managing idempotent reworkings even easier. Stay tuned.

=head1 Author

David E. Wheeler <david@justatheory.com>

=head1 License

Copyright (c) 2012-2014 iovation Inc.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.

=cut
