=head1 Name

sqitch-upgrade - Upgrade the registry to the current version

=head1 Synopsis

  sqitch upgrade [options] [<database>]

=head1 Description

Upgrades the Sqitch registry for a database. That is, it makes sure that the
schema the Sqitch uses for its registry is up-to-date. This will occasionally
be necessary when new features are added to Sqitch that require registry
schema changes.

The C<< <database> >> parameter specifies the database to which to connect,
and may also be specified as the C<--target> option. It can be target name,
a URI, an engine name, or plan file path.

=head1 Options

=over

=item C<-t>

=item C<--target>

The target database to which to connect. This option can be either a URI or
the name of a target in the configuration.

=item C<--registry>

  sqitch upgrade --registry registry

The name of the Sqitch registry schema or database in which sqitch stores its
own data.

=item C<--db-client>

=item C<--client>

  sqitch upgrade --client /usr/local/pgsql/bin/psql

Path to the command-line client for the database engine. Defaults to a client
in the current path named appropriately for the database engine.

=item C<-d>

=item C<--db-name>

  sqitch upgrade --db-name widgets
  sqitch upgrade -d bricolage

Name of the database. In general, L<targets|sqitch-target> and URIs are
preferred, but this option can be used to override the database name in a
target.

=item C<-u>

=item C<--db-user>

=item C<--db-username>

  sqitch upgrade --db-username root
  sqitch upgrade --db-user postgres
  sqitch upgrade -u Mom

User name to use when connecting to the database. Does not apply to all
engines. In general, L<targets|sqitch-target> and URIs are preferred, but this
option can be used to override the user name in a target.

=item C<-h>

=item C<--db-host>

  sqitch upgrade --db-host db.example.com
  sqitch upgrade -h appdb.example.net

Host name to use when connecting to the database. Does not apply to all
engines. In general, L<targets|sqitch-target> and URIs are preferred, but this
option can be used to override the host name in a target.

=item C<-p>

=item C<--db-port>

  sqitch upgrade --db-port 7654
  sqitch upgrade -p 5431

Port number to connect to. Does not apply to all engines. In general,
L<targets|sqitch-target> and URIs are preferred, but this option can be used
to override the port in a target.

=back

=head1 Sqitch

Part of the L<sqitch> suite.
