=head1 Name

sqitch-bundle - Bundle a Sqitch project for distribution

=head1 Synopsis

  sqitch [options] bundle
  sqitch [options] bundle --dest-dir widgets-1.0.0
  sqitch [options] bundle --all
  sqitch [options] bundle pg mysql

=head1 Description

This command bundles up a sqitch project for distribution. At its simplest, it
copies the project configuration file, plan files, and all of the change
scripts to a directory. This directory can then be packaged up for
distribution (as a tarball, RPM, etc.).

By default, the C<bundle> command will bundle the plan and scripts for the
default plan and top directory, as defined by the core configuration and
command-line options. Pass the C<--all> option to have it iterate over all
known plans and top directories (as specified for engines and targets) and
bundle them all. This works well for creating a a single bundle with all
plans and scripts.

To specify which plans an top directories to bundle, pass the target, engine,
or plan file names as arguments. See L</Examples> for examples.

=over

=item * Engine names

=item * Target names

=item * Plan file names

=back

You can also pass the core C<--engine> option to limit the bundle to the plan
for a single engine.

The bundle command also allows you to limit bundled changes to a subset of
those in a plan. When bundling a single plan, use the C<--from> and/or C<--to>
options to do the limiting. When using multiple plans, specify the changes
after each target argument. In either case, the changes can be specified in
any way documented on L<sqitchchanges>. See L</Examples> for examples.

=head1 Options

=over

=item C<--dest-dir>

=item C<--dir>

The name of the directory in which to bundle the project. The configuration
file will be created in this directory, and all top, deploy, revert, and
verify directories will be created relative to it. Defaults to F<bundle>.

=item C<--from>

The change from which to start bundling. If you need to bundle up only a subset
of a plan, specify a change (using a supported L<change specification|sqitchchanges>
from which to start the bundling via this option. This option is probably only
useful when bundling a single plan.

=item C<--to>

The change to which to end bundling. If you need to bundle up only a subset
of a plan, specify a change (using a supported L<change specification|sqitchchanges>
that should be the last change to be included in the bundle. This option is
probably only useful when bundling a single plan.

=item C<-a>

=item C<--all>

Bundle all the project plans and their associated scripts. Cannot be mixed
with target, engine, or plan file name arguments; doing so will result in an
error. Useful for multi-plan projects that should have all the plans bundled
together. Overrides the value of the C<bundle.all> configuration; use
C<--no-all> to override a true C<bundle.all> configuration.

=back

=head1 Configuration Variables

=over

=item C<bundle.dest_dir>

The name of the directory in which to bundle the project.

=back

=head1 Examples

Bundle a Sqitch project with the default plan and scripts into F<bundle>:

  sqitch bundle

Bundle a Sqitch project with all plans and scripts into F<bundle>:

  sqitch bundle --all

Bundle a Sqitch project into F<BUILDROOT/MyProj>:

  sqitch bundle --dest-dir BUILDROOT/MyProj

Bundle a project including changes C<adduser> through C<@v1.0>:

  sqitch bundle --from adduser --to @v1.0

Bundle a the C<pg> engine plans with changes C<adduser> through C<@v1.0>, and
the C<sqlite> engine with changes from the start of the plan up to C<widgets>:

  sqitch bundle pg adduser @v1.0 sqlite @ROOT wigets

Bundle just the files necessary to execute the plan for the C<pg> engine:

  sqitch bundle pg

Bundle the files necessary for two plan files:

  sqitch bundle sqlite/sqitch.plan mysql/sqitch.plan

=head1 Sqitch

Part of the L<sqitch> suite.
