=head1 Name

sqitch-config - Get and set local, user, or system Sqitch options

=head1 Synopsis

  sqitch config [<file-option>] [type] name [value [value_regex]]
  sqitch config [<file-option>] [type] --add name value
  sqitch config [<file-option>] [type] --replace-all name value [value_regex]
  sqitch config [<file-option>] [type] --get name [value_regex]
  sqitch config [<file-option>] [type] --get-all name [value_regex]
  sqitch config [<file-option>] [type] --get-regexp name_regex [value_regex]
  sqitch config [<file-option>] --unset name [value_regex]
  sqitch config [<file-option>] --unset-all name [value_regex]
  sqitch config [<file-option>] --rename-section old_name new_name
  sqitch config [<file-option>] --remove-section name
  sqitch config [<file-option>] -l | --list
  sqitch config [<file-option>] -e | --edit

=head1 Description

You can query/set/replace/unset Sqitch options with this command. The name is
actually the section and the key separated by a dot, and the value will be
escaped.

Multiple lines can be added to an option by using the C<--add> option. If you
want to update or unset an option which can occur on multiple lines, a Perl
regular expression C<value_regex> needs to be given. Only the existing values
that match the regex will be updated or unset. If you want to handle lines
that do not match the regex, just prepend a single C<!> (exclamation point) in
front (see L<Examples>).

The C<type> specifier can be C<--int>, C<--num>, or C<--bool>, to ensure that
the variable(s) are of the given type and convert the value to the canonical
form (simple integer for C<--int>, decimal number for C<--num>, a "true" or
"false" string for C<--bool>) If no type specifier is passed, no checks or
transformations are performed on the value.

The C<file-option> can be one of C<--local>, C<--user>, C<--system>, or
C<--file>, which specify where the values will be read from or written to. The
default is to assume the local config file in the current project directory,
for editing, and the all files merged for fetching (see L<Files>).

=begin comment

XXX Need to implmenent these.

This command will fail (with exit code ret) if:

=over

=item 1.

The config file is invalid (ret=3)

=item 2.

Cannot write to the config file (ret=4)

=item 3.

No section or name was provided (ret=2)

=item 4.

The section or key is invalid (ret=1)

=item 5.

You try to unset an option which does not exist (ret=5)

=item 6.

You try to unset/set an option for which multiple lines match (ret=5)

=item 7.

You try to use an invalid regexp (ret=6)

=item 8.

You use C<--user> option without C<$HOME> being properly set (ret=128)

=back

=end comment

On success, the command returns the exit code 0.

=head1 Options

=over

=item C<--replace-all>

The default behavior is to replace at most one line. This replaces all lines
matching the key (and optionally the C<value_regex>).

=item C<--add>

Adds a new line to the option without altering any existing values. This is
the same as providing C<^$> as the value_regex in C<--replace-all>.

=item C<--get>

Get the value for a given key (optionally filtered by a regex matching the
value). Returns error code 1 if the key was not found and error code 2 if
multiple values were found.

=item C<--get-all>

Like C<--get>, but does not fail if the number of values for the key is not
exactly one.

=item C<--get-regexp>

Like C<--get-all>, but interprets the name as a regular expression and writes
out the key names and value.

=item C<--local>

For writing options: write to the local F<./sqitch.conf> file. This is
the default if no file option is specified.

For reading options: read only from the local F<./sqitch.conf> file rather
than from all available files.

See also L<Files>.

=item C<--user>

For writing options: write to the user F<~/.sqitch/sqitch.conf> file rather
than the repository F<./sqitch.conf>.

For reading options: read only from the user F<~/.sqitch/sqitch.conf> file
rather than from all available files.

See also L<Files>.

=item C<--system>

For writing options: write to system-wide F<$(etc_path)/sqitch.conf> file
rather than the repository F<./sqitch.conf>.

For reading options: read only from system-wide F<$($etc_prefix)/sqitch.conf>
file rather than from all available files.

See also L<Files>.

=item C<-f config-file, --file config-file>

Use the given config file instead of the one specified by C<$SQITCH_CONFIG>.

=item C<--remove-section>

Remove the given section from the configuration file.

=item C<--rename-section>

Rename the given section to a new name.

=item C<--unset>

Remove the line matching the key from config file.

=item C<--unset-all>

Remove all lines matching the key from config file.

=item C<-l, --list>

List all variables set in config file.

=item C<--bool>

C<sqitch config> will ensure that the output is "true" or "false".

=item C<--int>

C<sqitch config> will ensure that the output is a simple integer.

=item C<--num>

C<sqitch config> will ensure that the output is a simple decimal number.

=item C<--bool-or-int>

C<sqitch config> will ensure that the output matches the format of either
C<--bool> or C<--int>, as described above.

=item C<-e, --edit>

Opens an editor to modify the specified config file; either C<--local>,
C<--user>, C<--system>, or C<--file>. If none of those options is specified,
the local file will be opened.

=back

=head1 Files

If not set explicitly with C<--file>, there are three files in which
C<sqitch config> will search for configuration options:

=over

=item F<./sqitch.conf>

Local, project-specific configuration file.

=item F<~/.sqitch/sqitch.conf>

User-specific configuration file.

=item F<$($etc_prefix)/sqitch.conf>

System-wide configuration file.

=back

=head1 Environment

=over

=item C<SQITCH_CONFIG>

Take the local configuration from the given file instead of C<./sqitch.conf>.

=item C<SQITCH_USER_CONFIG>

Take the user configuration from the given file instead of
C<~/.sqitch/sqitch.conf>.

=item C<SQITCH_SYSTEM_CONFIG>

Take the system configuration from the given file instead of
C<$($etc_prefix)/sqitch.conf>.

=back

=head1 Examples

Given a F<./sqitch.conf> like this:

  #
  # This is the config file, and
  # a '#' or ';' character indicates
  # a comment
  #

  ; core variables
  [core]
          ; Use PostgreSQL
          engine    = pg

  ; Bundle command settings.
  [bundle]
          from      = gamma
          tags_only = false
          dest_dir  = _build/sql

  ; Revert command settings
  [core "pg"]
          set        = foo=bar
          set        = baz=yo

You can set the the C<tags_only> setting to true with

  % sqitch config bundle.tags_only true

The hypothetical C<set> key in the C<core.pg> section might need to set C<foo>
to "hi" instead of "bar". Here's how to make that change:

  % sqitch config core.pg.set foo=bar foo=hi

To delete the entry for C<bundle.from>, do

  % sqitch config --unset bundle.from

If you want to delete an entry for a multivalue setting (like C<core.pg.set>),
provide a regex matching the value of exactly one line.

To query the value for a given key, do:

  % sqitch config --get core.engine

Or:

  % sqitch config core.engine

Or, to query a multivalue setting for only those values that match C</ba/>:

  % sqitch config --get core.pg.set ba

If you want to know all the values for a multivalue setting, do:

  % sqitch config --get-all core.pg.set

If you like to live dangerously, you can replace all C<core.pg.set> with a
new one with

  % sqitch config --replace-all core.pg.set bring=funk

However, if you only want to replace the line without C<baz>, do something
like this:

  % sqitch config core.pg.set = '!baz'

To match only values with an exclamation mark, you have to escape them:

  % sqitch config section.key value '[!]'

To add a new setting without altering any of the existing ones, use:

  % sqitch config core.pg.set widget=fred

=head1 Configuration File

The sqitch configuration file contains a number of variables that affect the
sqitch command's behavior. The F<./sqitch.conf> file local to each project is
used to store the configuration for that project, and
F<$HOME/.sqitch/sqitch.conf> is used to store a per-user configuration as
fallback values for the F<./sqitch.conf> file. The file
F<$($etc_prefix)/sqitch.conf> can be used to store a system-wide default
configuration.

The variables are divided into sections, wherein the fully qualified variable
name of the variable itself is the last dot-separated segment and the section
name is everything before the last dot. The variable names are
case-insensitive, allow only alphanumeric characters and -, and must start
with an alphabetic character. Some variables may appear multiple times.

=head2 Syntax

The syntax is fairly flexible and permissive; white space is mostly ignored.
The C<#> and C<;> characters begin comments to the end of line, blank lines
are ignored.

The file consists of sections and variables. A section begins with the name of
the section in square brackets and continues until the next section begins.
Section names are not case sensitive. Only alphanumeric characters, C<-> and
C<.> are allowed in section names. Each variable must belong to some section,
which means that there must be a section header before the first setting of a
variable.

Sections can be further divided into subsections. To begin a subsection put
its name in double quotes, separated by space from the section name, in the
section header, like in the example below:

     [section "subsection"]

Subsection names are case sensitive and can contain any characters except
newline (double quote and backslash have to be escaped as C<\"> and C<\\>,
respectively). Section headers cannot span multiple lines. Variables may
belong directly to a section or to a given subsection. You can have
C<[section]> if you have C<[section "subsection"]>, but you don't need to.

All the other lines (and the remainder of the line after the section header)
are recognized as setting variables, in the form C<name = value>. If there is
no equal sign on the line, the entire line is taken as name and the variable
is recognized as boolean C<true>. The variable names are case-insensitive,
allow only alphanumeric characters and C<->, and must start with an alphabetic
character. There can be more than one value for a given variable; we say then
that the variable is multivalued.

Leading and trailing whitespace in a variable value is discarded. Internal
whitespace within a variable value is retained verbatim.

The values following the equals sign in variable assignments are either
strings, integers, numbers, or booleans. Boolean values may be given as
yes/no, 1/0, true/false or on/off. Case is not significant in boolean values,
when converting value to the canonical form using the C<--bool> type
specifier; C<sqitch config> will ensure that the output is "true" or "false".

String values may be entirely or partially enclosed in double quotes. You need
to enclose variable values in double quotes if you want to preserve leading or
trailing whitespace, or if the variable value contains comment characters
(i.e. it contains C<#> or C<;>). Double quote and backslash characters in
variable values must be escaped: use C<\"> for C<"> and C<\\> for C<\>.

The following escape sequences (beside C<\"> and C<\\>) are recognized: C<\n>
for newline character (NL), C<\t> for horizontal tabulation (HT, TAB) and
C<\b> for backspace (BS). No other character escape sequence or octal
character sequence is valid.

Variable values ending in a C<\> are continued on the next line in the
customary UNIX fashion.

Some variables may require a special value format.

=head2 Example

  # Core variables
  [core]
      engine    = pg
      top_dir   = migrations
      extension = ddl

  [core "pg"]
      db_name   = widgetopolis

  [revert]
      to        = gamma

  [bundle]
      from      = gamma
      tags_only = yes
      dest_dir  = _build/sql

=head2 Variables

Note that this list is not comprehensive and not necessarily complete. For
command-specific variables, you will find a more detailed description in the
appropriate manual page.

=over

=item C<core.plan_file>

The plan file to use. Defaults to F<$top_dir/sqitch.plan>.

=item C<core.engine>

The database engine to use. Supported engines include:

=over

=item * C<pg> - L<PostgreSQL|http://postgresql.org/>

=item * C<sqlite> - L<SQLite|http://sqlite.org/>

=item * C<oracle> - L<Oracle|http://www.oracle.com/us/products/database/>

=item * C<mysql> - L<MySQL|http://dev.mysql.com/>

=back

=item C<core.top_dir>

Path to directory containing deploy, revert, and verify SQL scripts. It
should contain subdirectories named C<deploy>, C<revert>, and (optionally)
C<verify>. These may be overridden by C<deploy_dir>, C<revert_dir>, and
C<verify_dir>. Defaults to C<./sql>.

=item C<core.deploy_dir>

Path to a directory containing SQL deployment scripts. Overrides the value
implied by C<core.top_dir>.

=item C<core.revert_dir>

Path to a directory containing SQL reversion scripts. Overrides the value
implied by C<core.top_dir>.

=item C<core.verify_dir>

Path to a directory containing SQL verify scripts. Overrides the value implied
by C<core.top_dir>.

=item C<core.extension>

The file name extension on deploy, revert, and verify SQL scripts. Defaults to
C<sql>.

=item C<core.verbosity>

An integer determining how verbose Sqitch should be. Defaults to 1. Set to 0
to silence status messages and to 2 or three to increase verbosity. Error
message output will not be affected by this property.

=back

=head3 C<user>

Configuration properties that identify the user.

=over

=item C<user.name>

Your full name, to be recorded in changes and tags added to the plan,
and to to commits to the database.

=item C<user.email>

Your email address, to be recorded in changes and tags added to the plan, and
to to commits to the database.

=back

=head3 C<core.pg>

Configuration properties for the PostgreSQL engine.

=over

=item C<core.pg.client>

Path to the C<psql> command-line client. Defaults to the first instance
found in the path.

=item C<core.pg.database>

PostgreSQL database key or connection URI.

=item C<core.pg.registry>

The name of the Sqitch registry schema. Sqitch will store its own data in this
schema. No other data should be stored there. Defaults to C<sqitch>.

=back

=head3 C<core.sqlite>

Configuration properties for the SQLite engine.

=over

=item C<core.sqlite.client>

Path to the C<sqlite3> command-line client. Defaults to the first instance
found in the path.

=item C<core.sqlite.database>

SQLite database key or connection URI.

=item C<core.sqlite.registry>

Name to use for the Sqitch registry database. Sqitch will store its own data
in this database. If the value look like an absolute path, then it will be the
database file. Otherwise, it will be in the same directory as the database.
Defaults to C<sqitch>.

=back

=head3 C<core.mysql>

Configuration properties for the MySQL engine.

=over

=item C<core.mysql.client>

Path to the C<mysql> command-line client. Defaults to the first instance
found in the path.

=item C<core.mysql.database>

MySQL database key or connection URI.

=item C<core.mysql.registry>

The name of the Sqitch registry database. Sqitch will store its own data in
this database. Defaults to C<sqitch>. If you need to manage multiple databases
on a single server, and don't want them all to share the same registry, change
this property to a value specific for your database.

=back

=head3 C<core.oracle>

Configuration properties for the Oracle engine.

=over

=item C<core.oracle.client>

Path to the C<sqlplus> command-line client. Defaults to the first instance
found in C<$ORACLE_HOME> or the path.

=item C<core.oracle.database>

Oracle database key or connection URI.

=item C<core.oracle.registry>

The name of the Sqitch registry schema. Sqitch will store its own data in this
schema. No other data should be stored there. Uses the current schema by
default (usually the same name as the connection user.

=back

=head3 C<core.vcs>

Configuration properties for the version control system. Currently, only Git
is supported.

=over

=item C<core.vcs.client>

Path to the C<VCS> command-line client. Defaults to the first instance of
F<git> found in the path.

=back

=head3 C<user>

=over

=item C<user.email>

Your email address to be recorded in any newly planned changes.

=item C<user.name>

Your full name to be recorded in any newly planned changes.

=back

=head1 Sqitch

Part of the L<sqitch> suite.
