=head1 Name

sqitch - SQL Change Management

=head1 Synopsis

  sqitch [<options>] <command> [<command-options>] [<args>]

=head1 Description

Sqitch is a VCS-aware SQL change management application. What makes it
different from your typical
L<migration|Module::Build::DB>-L<style|DBIx::Migration> approaches? A few
things:

=begin comment

Eventually move to L<sqitchintro>?

=end comment

=over

=item No opinions

Sqitch is not integrated with any framework, ORM, or platform. Rather, it is a
standalone change management system with no opinions on your database or
development choices.

=item Native scripting

Changes are implemented as scripts native to your selected database engine.
Writing a L<PostgreSQL|http://postgresql.org/> application? Write SQL scripts
for L<C<psql>|http://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/app-psql.html>.
Writing a L<MySQL|http://mysql.com/>-backed app? Write SQL scripts for
L<C<mysql>|http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.6/en/mysql.html>.

=item VCS integration

Sqitch likes to use your VCS history to determine in what order to execute
changes. No need to keep track of execution order; your VCS already tracks
information sufficient for Sqitch to figure it out for you.

=item Dependency resolution

Deployment steps can declare dependencies on other deployment steps. This
ensures proper order of execution, even when you've committed changes to your
VCS out-of-order.

=item No numbering

Change deployment is managed either by maintaining a plan file or, more
usefully, your VCS history. As such, there is no need to number your changes,
although you can if you want. Sqitch doesn't much care what you name your
changes.

=item Bundling

Rely on your VCS history for deployment but have Sqitch bundle up changes for
distribution. Sqitch can read your VCS history and write out a plan file along
with the appropriate deployment and reversion scripts. Once the bundle is
installed on a new system, Sqitch can use the plan file to deploy or the
changes in the proper order.

=item Reduced Duplication

If you're using a VCS to track your changes, you don't have to duplicate
entire change scripts for simple changes. As long as the changes are
L<idempotent|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idempotence>, you can change
your code directly, and Sqitch will know it needs to be updated.

=back

=begin comment

Eventually move to L<sqitchtutorial> or L<sqitchintro> or some such.

=end comment

=head2 Terminology

=over

=item C<step>

A named unit of change. A step name must be used in the file names of its
deployment and a reversion scripts. It may also be used in a test script file
name.

=item C<tag>

A known deployment state with a list one or more steps that define the tag. A
tag also implies that steps from previous tags in the plan have been applied.
Think of it is a version number or VCS revision. A given point in the plan may
have one or more tags.

=item C<state>

The current state of the database. This is represented by the most
recently-deployed steps and tags. If the state of the database is the same as
the most recent tag, then it is considered "up-to-date".

=item C<plan>

A list of one or more tags and associated steps that define the order of
deployment execution. Sqitch reads the plan to determine what steps to execute
to change the database from one state to another. The plan may be represented
by a L<Plan File> or by VCS history.

=item C<deploy>

The act of deploying database changes to reach a tagged deployment point.
Sqitch reads the plan, checks the current state of the database, and applies
all the steps necessary to change the state to the specified tag.

=item C<revert>

The act of reverting database changes to reach an earlier tagged deployment
point. Sqitch checks the current state of the database, reads the plan, and
reverts all steps necessary to return the state to an earlier tag.

=back

=head1 Options

     --plan-file  FILE    Path to a deployment plan file.
     --engine     ENGINE  Database engine.
     --client     PATH    Path to the engine command-line client.
  -d --db-name    NAME    Database name.
  -u --username   USER    Database user name.
     --host       HOST    Database server host name.
     --port       PORT    Database server port number.
     --uri        URI     Project unique identifier.
     --sql-dir    DIR     Path to directory with deploy and revert scripts.
     --deploy-dir DIR     Path to directory with SQL deployment scripts.
     --revert-dir DIR     Path to directory with SQL reversion scripts.
     --test-dir   DIR     Path to directory with SQL test scripts.
     --extension  EXT     SQL script file name extension.
     --dry-run            Execute command without making any changes.
     --etc-path           Print the path to the etc directory and exit.
     --quiet              Quiet mode with non-error output suppressed.
     --verbose            Increment verbosity.
     --version            Print the version number and exit.
     --help               Print a usage statement and exit.
     --man                Print the complete documentation and exit.

=head1 Options Details

=over

=item C<--plan-file>

  sqitch --plan-file plan.txt

Path to the deployment plan file. Defaults to F<./sqitch.plan>. If this file
is not present, Sqitch will attempt to read from VCS files. If no supported
VCS system is in place, an exception will be thrown. See L</Plan File> for a
description of its structure.

=item C<--engine>

  sqitch --engine pg

The database engine to use. Supported engines include:

=over

=item * C<pg> - L<PostgreSQL|http://postgresql.org/>

=item * C<mysql> - L<MySQL|http://mysql.com/>

=item * C<sqlite> - L<SQLite|http://sqlite.org/>

=back

=item C<--client>

  sqitch --client /usr/local/pgsql/bin/psql

Path to the command-line client for the database engine. Defaults to a client
in the current path named appropriately for the specified engine.

=item C<-d>

=item C<--db-name>

  sqitch --db-name widgets
  sqitch -d bricolage

Name of the database. For some engines, such as
L<PostgreSQL|http://postgresql.org/> and L<MySQL|http://mysql.com/>, the
database must already exist. For others, such as L<SQLite|http://sqlite.org/>,
the database will be automatically created on first connect.

=item C<-u>

=item C<--user>

=item C<--username>

  sqitch --username root
  sqitch --user postgres
  sqitch -u Mom

User name to use when connecting to the database. Does not apply to all engines.

=item C<--host>

  sqitch --host db.example.com

Host name to use when connecting to the database. Does not apply to all
engines.

=item C<--port>

  sqitch --port 7654

Port number to connect to. Does not apply to all engines.

=item C<--uri>

  sqitch --uri https://github.com/theory/sqitch/

A uniform resource identifier that uniquely identifies the project. Used to
generate unique IDs for project steps, and so should be consistently used in
the project. Thus it it is probably best set as a local configuration setting
(C<core.uri>).

=item C<--sql-dir>

  sqitch --sql-dir migrations/

Path to directory containing deployment, reversion, and test SQL scripts. It
should contain subdirectories named C<deploy>, C<revert>, and (optionally)
C<test>. These may be overridden by C<--deploy-dir>, C<--revert-dir>, and
C<--test-dir>. Defaults to C<./sql>.

=item C<--deploy-dir>

  sqitch --deploy-dir db/up

Path to a directory containing SQL deployment scripts. Overrides the value
implied by C<--sql-dir>.

=item C<--revert-dir>

  sqitch --revert-dir db/up

Path to a directory containing SQL reversion scripts. Overrides the value
implied by C<--sql-dir>.

=item C<--test-dir>

  sqitch --test-dir db/t

Path to a directory containing SQL test scripts. Overrides the value implied
by C<--sql-dir>.

=item C<--extension>

  sqitch --extension ddl

The file name extension on deployment, reversion, and test SQL scripts.
Defaults to C<sql>.

=item C<--dry-run>

  sqitch --dry-run

Execute the Sqitch command without making any actual changes. This allows you
to see what Sqitch would actually do, without doing it. Implies a verbosity
level of 1; add extra C<--verbose>s for greater verbosity.

=item C<--etc-path>

  sqitch --etc-path

Print out the path to the Sqitch F<etc> directory and exit. This is the
directory where the system-wide configuration file lives, as well as
deployment script templates.

=item C<--quiet>

Suppress normal output messages. Error messages will still be emitted to
C<STDERR>. Overrides any value specified by C<--verbose>.

=item C<--verbose>

  sqitch --verbose --verbose

A value between 0 and 3 specifying how verbose Sqitch should be. Unless
C<--quiet> is specified, the default is 1, meaning that Sqitch will output
basic status messages as it does its thing. Values of 2 and 3 each cause
greater verbosity. Ignored if C<--quiet> is specified.

=item C<--help>

  sqitch --help

Outputs a brief description of the options supported by C<sqitch> and exits.

=item C<--man>

  sqitch --man

Outputs this documentation and exits.

=item C<-V>

=item C<--version>

  sqitch --version

Outputs the program name and version and exits.

=back

=head1 Sqitch Commands

=over

=item L<C<init>|sqitch-init>

Create the plan file and deployment script directories if they do not already
exist. This command is useful for starting a new Sqitch project.

=item C<status>

Output information about the current status of the deployment, including a
list of tags, deployments, and dates in chronological order. If any deploy
scripts are not currently deployed, they will be listed separately. Options:

=over

=item C<-s>

=item C<--show>

How much information to show. This option may be passed without a C<-s> or
C<--show>. Possible values include:

=over

=item C<latest>

Show only the latest change. This is the default.

=item C<tags>

Show a list of all deployed tags.

=item C<steps>

Show a list of all deployed steps.

=back

=item C<format>

The format to use to display tags or steps, if either are specified via the
C<--show> option. The value may be any one of:

=over

=item C<oneline>

=item C<table>

=back

=back

=item C<log>

Output the complete change history in reverse chronological order. Options:

=over

=item C<-t>

=item C<--tag>

Show only changes for the specified tag. This option may be passed without a
C<-t> or C<--tag>.

=item C<-s>

=item C<--step>

Show only the specified step.

=item C<-n>

=item C<--max-count>

Limit the number of changes to show.

=item C<--skip>

Skip the specified number changes before starting to show the log output.

=item C<--since>

Show changes more recent than a specific date.

=item C<--until>

Show changes older than a specific date.

=item C<--user>

Limit the changes output to ones where the user name matches the specified
pattern (regular expression).

=item C<--reverse>

Output the changes in reverse sort order.

=item C<--format>

The format to use. The value may be any one of:

=over

=item C<short>

=item C<oneline>

=item C<full>

=item C<table>

=back

=back

=item C<check>

Sanity check the deployment scripts. Checks include:

=over

=item *

Make sure all deployment scripts have complementary reversion scripts.

=item *

Make sure no deployment script appears more than once in the plan file.

=back

=item C<add-step>

Add a new step. The specified name will be used to create stub deployment and
reversion scripts. The contents of these scripts must then be edited to carry
out the actual changes to the database. Options:

=over

=item C<-n>

=item C<--named>

The name of the step. Must be a valid step name. This option may be passed
without a C<-n> or C<--named>.

=item C<-r>

=item C<--requires>

Name of a step that is required by the new step.

=item C<-c>

=item C<--conflicts>

Name of a step that conflicts with the new step.

=back

=item C<deploy>

Deploy changes. Configuration properties may be specified under the
C<[deploy]> section of the configuration file, or via C<sqitch config>:

  sqitch config deploy.$property $value

Options and configuration properties:

=over

=item C<--to>

Step or tag to deploy up to. Defaults to the latest tag or to the VCS C<HEAD>
commit. Property name: C<deploy.to>.

=item C<-u>

=item C<--untracked>

Also deploy any steps that have been added to the F<deploy> directory but have
not yet been added to the plan or committed to the VCS. Useful when developing
new deployment steps but have not yet committed them.

=back

=item C<revert>

Revert changes. Configuration properties may be specified under the
C<[revert]> section of the configuration file, or via C<sqitch config>:

  sqitch config revert.$property $value

Options and configuration properties:

=over

=item C<--to>

Tag to revert to. Defaults to reverting all changes. Property name:
C<revert.to>.

=back

=item C<test>

Test changes. All SQL scripts in C<--test-dir> will be run.
[XXX Not sure whether to have subdirectories for tests and expected output and
to diff them, or to use some other approach.]

=item L<C<config>|sqitch-config>

Get and set project, user, or system Sqitch options. By default, the options
will be written to the local configuration file, F<sqitch.conf>

=item C<bundle>

Bundle up deployment and reversion scripts and write out a plan file.
Configuration properties may be specified under the C<[bundle]> section of the
configuration file, or via C<sqitch config bundle.$property $value> command.
Options and configuration properties:

=over

=item C<--from>

Tag to start the plan from. All tags and steps prior to that tag will not be
included in the plan, and their change scripts Will be omitted from the bundle
directory. Useful if you've rejiggered your deployment steps to start from a
point later in your VCS history than the beginning of time. Property name:
C<bundle.from>.

=item C<--to>

Tag with which to end the plan. No steps or tags after that tag will be
included in the plan, and their change scripts will be omitted from the bundle
directory. Property name: C<bundle.to>.

=item C<--tags-only>

Write the plan file with deployment targets listed under VCS tags, rather than
individual commits. Property name: C<bundle.tags_only>.

=item C<--destdir>

Specify a destination directory. The plan file and C<deploy>, C<revert>, and
C<test> directories will be written to it. Defaults to "bundle". Property
name: C<bundle.destdir>.

=back

=item L<C<help>|sqitch-help>

Show help for a specific command or, if no command is specified, show the same
documentation as C<--help>.

=back

=head1 Configuration

Sqitch configuration can be set up on a project, user, or system-wide basis.
The format of the configuration file, named F<sqitch.conf>, is the same as for
L<git>.

Here's an example of a configuration file that might be useful checked into a
VCS for a project that deploys to PostgreSQL and stores its deployment scripts
with the extension F<ddl> under the C<migrations> directory. It also wants
bundle to be created in the F<_build/sql> directory, and to deploy starting
with the "gamma" tag:

  [core]
      uri       = https://github.com/theory/sqitch/
      engine    = pg
      db        = widgetopolis
      sql_dir   = migrations
      extension = ddl

  [revert]
      to        = gamma

  [bundle]
      from      = gamma
      tags_only = yes
      dest_dir  = _build/sql

And here's an example of useful configuration in F<~/.sqitch/sqitch.conf>, to
point to system-specific engine information:

  [core.pg]
      client    = /usr/local/pgsql/bin/psql
      username  = theory

  [core.mysql]
      client    = /usr/local/mysql/bin/mysql
      username  = root

  [core.sqlite]
      client    = /usr/local/bin/sqlite3

Various commands read from the configuration file and adjust their operation
accordingly. See L<sqitch-config> for a list.

=head1 Plan File

A plan file describes the deployment steps to be run against a database. Its
contents must be plain text encoded as UTF-8. Each line of a plan file may be
one of four things:

=over

=item *

A blank line. May include any amount of white space, which will be ignored.

=item * A comment.

Begins with a C<#> and goes to the end of the line. Preceding white space is
ignored.

=item * A Pragma

Begins with a C<%>, followed by a pragma name, optionally followed by C<=> and
a value. Currently, the only pragma recognized by Sqitch is C<syntax-version>.

=item * A step.

A named change step. A step consists of an optional C<+> or C<-> character
followed by one or more non-whitespace characters, of which the first and last
characters must not be punctuation characters. Steps with a leading C<-> are
slated to be reverted, while steps with no character or a leading C<+> are to
be deployed. Comments or white space after the step name will be ignored.

=item * A tag.

A named deployment tag, generally corresponding to a release name. Begins with
a C<@>, followed by one or more non-whitespace characters. The first and last
characters must not be punctuation characters. Comments or white space after
the step name will be ignored.

=back

Here's an example of a plan file with a single deploy step and tag:

 %syntax-version=1.0.0
 +users_table
 @alpha

There may, of course, be any number of tags and steps. Here's an expansion:

 %syntax-version=1.0.0
 +users_table
 +insert_user
 +update_user
 +delete_user
 @root
 @alpha

Here we have four steps -- "users_table", "insert_user", "update_user", and
"delete_user" -- followed by two tags: "root" and "alpha".

Most plans will have many steps and tags. Here's a longer example with three
tagged deployment points, as well as a step that is deployed and later
reverted:

 %syntax-version=1.0.0
 +users_table
 +insert_user
 +update_user
 +delete_user
 +dr_evil
 @root
 @alpha

 +widgets_table
 +list_widgets
 @beta

 -dr_evil
 +ftw
 @gamma

Using this plan, to deploy to the "beta" tag, all of the steps up to the
"root"/"alpha" tags must be deployed, as must steps listed before the "beta"
tag. To then deploy to the "gamma" tag, the "dr_evil" step must be reverted
and the "ftw" step must be deployed. If you then choose to revert to the
"alpha" tag, then the "ftw" step will be reverted, the "dr_evil" step
re-deployed, and the "gamma" tag removed; then the "list_widgets" must be
reverted and the associated "beta" tag removed, then the "widgets_table" step
must be reverted.

Using this model, steps cannot be repeated between states. One I<can> repeat
them, however, if the contents for a file in a given tag can be retrieved from
a VCS. An example:

 %syntax-version=1.0.0
 +users_table
 @alpha

 +add_widget
 +widgets_table
 @beta

 +add_user
 @gamma

 +widgets_created_at
 @delta

 +add_widget

Note that the "add_widget" step is repeated under the state tagged "beta" and
at the end. Sqitch will notice the repetition when it parses this file, and
allow it only if the "beta" tag is present in the VCS. In that case, when
doing a deployment, Sqitch will fetch the version of the file as of the "beta"
tag and apply it at that step, and then, when it gets to the last step,
retrieve the revision of the deployment as it currently exists in the VCS.
This works in reverse, as well, as long as the changes in this file are always
L<idempotent|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idempotence>.

=head2 Grammar

Here is the EBNF Grammar for the plan file:

  plan-file    = { <pragma> | <step-line> | <tag-line> | <comment-line> | <blank-line> }* ;

  blank-line   = [ <blanks> ] <eol>;
  comment-line = <comment> ;
  step-line    = <name> [ { <requires> | <conflicts} } ] ( <eol> | <comment> ) ;
  tag-line     = <tag> ( <eol> | <comment> ) ;
  pragma       = "%" [ <blanks> ] <name> [ <blanks> ] = [ <blanks> ] <value> ( <eol> | <comment> ) ;

  tag          = "@" <name> ;
  requires     = ":" <name> ;
  conflicts    = "!" <name> ;
  name         = <non-punct> [ [ ? non-blank and not "@" or "#" characters ? ] <non-punct> ] ;
  non-punct    = ? non-punctuation, non-blank character ? ;
  value        = ? non-EOL or "#" characters ?

  comment      = [ <blanks> ] "#" [ <string> ] <EOL> ;
  eol          = [ <blanks> ] <EOL> ;

  blanks       = ? blank characters ? ;
  string       = ? non-EOL characters ? ;

And written as regular expressions:

  my $eol          = qr/[[:blank:]]*$/
  my $comment      = qr/(?:[[:blank:]]+)?[#].+$/;
  my $name         = qr/[^[:punct:][:blank:]](?:(?:[^[:space:]@]+)?[^[:punct:][:blank:]])?/;
  my $tag          = qr/[@]$name/;
  my $requires     = qr/[:]$name/;
  my conflicts     = qr/[!]$name/;
  my $tag_line     = qr/^$tag(?:$comment|$eol)/;
  my $step_line    = qr/^$name(?:$requires|$conflicts)*(?:$comment|$eol)/;
  my $comment_line = qr/^$comment/;
  my $pragma    = qr/^][[:blank:]]*[%][[:blank:]]*$name[[:blank:]]*=[[:blank:]].+?(?:$comment|$eol)$/;
  my $blank_line   = qr/^$eol/;
  my $plan         = qr/(?:$pragma|$step_line|$tag_line|$comment_line|$blank_line)+/ms;

=head1 See Also

The original design for Sqitch was sketched out in a number of blog posts:

=over

=item *

L<Simple SQL Change Management|http://justatheory.com/computers/databases/simple-sql-change-management.html>

=item *

L<VCS-Enabled SQL Change Management|http://justatheory.com/computers/databases/vcs-sql-change-management.html>

=item *

L<SQL Change Management Sans Duplication|http://justatheory.com/computers/databases/sql-change-management-sans-redundancy.html>

=back

Other tools that do database change management include:

=over

=item L<Rails migrations|http://guides.rubyonrails.org/migrations.html>

Numbered migrations for L<Ruby on Rails|http://rubyonrails.org/>.

=item L<Module::Build::DB>

Numbered changes in pure SQL, integrated with Perl's L<Module::Build> build
system. Does not support reversion.

=item L<DBIx::Migration>

Numbered migrations in pure SQL.

=item L<Versioning|http://www.depesz.com/2010/08/22/versioning/>

PostgreSQL-specific dependency-tracking solution by
L<depesz|http://www.depesz.com/>.

=back

=head1 Author

David E. Wheeler <david@justatheory.com>

=head1 License

Copyright (c) 2012 iovation Inc.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.

=cut
