=head1 Name

sqitch-init - Create a new Sqitch project

=head1 Synopsis

  sqitch init <project>
  sqitch init <project> --uri <uri>

=head1 Description

This command creates an new Sqitch project -- basically a F<sqitch.conf> file,
a F<sqitch.plan> file, and F<deploy>, F<revert>, and F<verify> subdirectories.

Running sqitch init in an existing project is safe. It will not overwrite
things that are already there.

=head1 Options

=over

=item C<--uri>

  sqitch init widgets --uri https://github.com/me/wigets

Optional URI to associate with the project. If present, the URI will be
written to the project plan and used for added uniqueness in hashed object
IDs.

=item C<--engine>

  sqitch init widgets --engine pg

Specifies the default database engine to use in the project. Supported engines
include:

=over

=item * C<pg> - L<PostgreSQL|https://postgresql.org/> and L<Postgres-XC|https://sourceforge.net/>

=item * C<sqlite> - L<SQLite|https://sqlite.org/>

=item * C<oracle> - L<Oracle|https://www.oracle.com/us/products/database/>

=item * C<mysql> - L<MySQL|https://dev.mysql.com/> and L<MariaDB|https://mariadb.com/>

=item * C<firebird> - L<Firebird|https://www.firebirdsql.org/>

=item * C<vertica> - L<Vertica|https://my.vertica.com/>

=item * C<exasol> - L<Exasol|https://www.exasol.com/>

=item * C<snowflake> - L<Snowflake|https://www.snowflake.net/>

=back

=item C<--top-dir>

  sqitch init widgets --top-dir sql

Specifies the top directory to use for the project. Typically contains the
deployment plan file and the change script directories.

=item C<--plan-file>

=item C<-f>

  sqitch init widgets --plan-file my.plan

Specifies the path to the deployment plan file. Defaults to
C<$top_dir/sqitch.plan>.

=item C<--extension>

  sqitch init widgets --extension ddl

Specifies the file name extension to use for change script file names.
Defaults to C<sql>.

=item C<--dir>

  sqitch init widgets --dir deploy=dep --dir revert=rev --dir verify=tst

Sets the path to a script directory. May be specified multiple times.
Supported keys are:

=over

=item * C<deploy>

=item * C<revert>

=item * C<verify>

=item * C<reworked>

=item * C<reworked_deploy>

=item * C<reworked_revert>

=item * C<reworked_verify>

=back

=item C<--target>

  sqitch init widgets --target db:pg:widgets

Specifies the name or L<URI|https://github.com/libwww-perl/uri-db/> of the default
target database. If specified as a name, the default URI for the target will
be C<db:$engine:>.

=item C<--registry>

  sqitch init widgets --registry meta

Specifies the name of the database object where Sqitch's state and history
data is stored. Typically a schema name (as in PostgreSQL and Oracle) or a
database name (as in SQLite and MySQL). Defaults to C<sqitch>.

=item C<--client>

  sqitch init widgets --client /usr/local/pgsql/bin/psql

Specifies the path to the command-line client for the database engine.
Defaults to a client in the current path named appropriately for the specified
engine.

=back

=head1 Configuration

The most important thing C<sqitch init> does is create the project plan file,
F<sqitch.conf>. The options determine what gets written to the file:

=over

=item C<--engine>

Sets the C<core.engine> configuration variable.

=item C<--top-dir>

Sets the C<core.top_dir> configuration variable.

=item C<--plan-file>

=item C<-f>

Sets the C<core.plan_file> configuration variable.

=item C<--extension>

Sets the C<core.extension> configuration variable.

=item C<--dir>

Sets the following configuration variables:

=over

=item * C<deploy> sets C<core.deploy_dir>

=item * C<revert> sets C<core.revert_dir>

=item * C<verify> sets C<core.verify_dir>

=item * C<reworked> sets C<core.reworked_dir>

=item * C<reworked_deplpoy> sets C<core.reworked_deploy_dir>

=item * C<reworked_deplpoy> sets C<core.reworked_revert_dir>

=item * C<reworked_deplpoy> sets C<core.reworked_verify_dir>

=back

=item C<--target>

Sets the C<engine.$engine.target> configuration variable if C<--engine> is
also passed and, if it's a target name, C<target.$target.uri>

=item C<--registry>

Sets the C<engine.$engine.registry> configuration variable if C<--engine> is also
passed.

=item C<--client>

Sets the C<engine.$engine.client> configuration variable if C<--engine> is
also passed.

=item C<-s>

=item C<--set>

Set a variable name and value for use by the database engine client, if it
supports variables. The format must be C<name=value>, e.g.,
C<--set defuser='Homer Simpson'>. Variables are set in C<core.variables>.

=back

As a general rule, you likely won't need any of these options except for
C<--engine>, since many commands need to know what engine to use, and
specifying it on the command-line forever after would be annoying.

These variables will only be written if their corresponding options are
specified. Otherwise, core options get written as comments with user or system
configuration settings, or, failing any values from those locations, from
their default values. If no defaults are specified, they will still be
written, commented out, with a bar C<=> and no value. This allows one to know
what sorts of things are available to edit.

=head1 Examples

Start a new Sqitch project using the SQLite engine, setting the top directory
for the project to F<sqlite>:

  sqitch init --engine sqlite --top-dir sqlite

Start a new Sqitch project using the PostgreSQL engine, setting the top
directory to F<postgres>, script extension to C<ddl>, reworked directory to
C<reworked> and a version-specific client:

  sqitch init --engine  pg \
              --top-dir postgres \
              --client  /opt/pgsql-9.1/bin/psql \
              --extension ddl --dir reworked=reworked

=head1 See Also

=over

=item L<sqitch-configuration>

Describes how Sqitch hierarchical engine and target configuration works.

=item L<sqitch-engine>

Command to manage database engine configuration.

=item L<sqitch-target>

Command to manage target database configuration.

=item L<sqitch-config>

Command to manage all Sqitch configuration.

=back

=head1 Sqitch

Part of the L<sqitch> suite.
